Chapter 3
Data Transformation and Feature Engineering
THE AWS CERTIFIED MACHINE LEARNING (ML)
ENGINEER ASSOCIATE EXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED
IN THIS CHAPTER MAY INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT
LIMITED TO THE FOLLOWING:
✔ Domain 1: Data Preparation for Machine Learning
1.2 Transform data and perform feature engineering
1.3 Ensure data integrity and prepare data for modeling
Introduction
In Chapter 2, you learned how to ingest data from different sources and how to
store this data in AWS. Now that you have collected the data and secured it in
AWS, your job as a machine learning (ML) engineer is to make it ready to
train your ML model. This step is illustrated in the Process Data phase of the
ML lifecycle, as shown in Figure 3.1.
FIGURE 3.1 The ML lifecycle.
Your data is usually stored in its raw state in a data lake. A data lake
architecture can provide a solid foundation on which to build a ML solution
because it’s designed to store massive amounts of data in a central repository,
so it’s readily available to be categorized, processed, enriched, and consumed
by diverse groups within your organization.
The following are the key characteristics of a data lake:
Storage at scale. A data lake must be able to accommodate data
coming in any time, whether it be at predefined time intervals or in real
time, in small payloads, or in large batches.
Data movement. Just like a real lake has a river inlet that brings water
into the lake, and a river outlet that moves water out of the lake, a data
lake must allow for data movement in and out of the data lake.
Raw data. Data moved into the data lake may come from different
sources and may be structured, semi-structured, or unstructured. The
format of the data is irrelevant during the ingestion and the storage
phases of the data collection.
Security. Because sensitive data may be imported into the data lake, it
is critical that no unauthorized user has access to this data. As a result,
the data lake must be protected by robust identity and access management
(IAM) security controls. Encryption in use and in transit is no less
important than encryption at rest. Therefore, security guardrails should be
established and enforced to protect the data while it is produced and
consumed.
Catalog. Data lakes must allow you to store relational data (e.g.,
operational databases, line-of-business application data), and
nonrelational data (e.g., data from mobile apps, IoT devices, and social
media). They also give you the ability to understand what data is in the
lake through crawling, cataloging, and indexing of data.
To create a data lake in AWS, you would typically use a combination of the
following services: Amazon S3 (for storage), AWS Glue (for cataloging),
Amazon Athena (for querying), and AWS Lake Formation (for central
management of IAM, data security, and governance).
Except for AWS Lake Formation, we already covered these services in the
previous chapter. For the exam, you need to know that Amazon S3 is the
preferred storage option with a data lake on AWS because it provides highly
durable (99.999999999%), highly available, secure storage and seamless
integration with a number of data processing services and ML platforms on
AWS. Amazon S3 can be used as a single source of truth storage for most
AWS ML services. Additionally, with Amazon S3’s Intelligent-Tiering storage
class, you can reduce storage cost by letting AWS automatically determine
when to move data to the most suitable storage class.
AWS Lake Formation nicely supplements the aforementioned AWS services
by centralizing data permissions, simplifying security management and
governance at scale, monitoring data access, and ensuring compliance.
In the upcoming sections, you will learn the techniques that allow you to
process the data in your data lake and make it suitable to train your ML model,
resulting in meaningful inferences.
The ultimate goal of the Process Data phase is to produce quality data to
effectively train your ML model so it will learn faster from your data and it
will produce accurate predictions. The higher the quality of your training
dataset, the more accurate the inferences produced by your ML model.
Understanding Feature Engineering
Before deep diving into feature engineering, let’s focus on understanding the
different types of data:
Categorical data. Categorical data contains a finite number of distinct
categories, where each category is represented with a string. Categorical
data might have a logical order, such as the size of a shirt: Small,
Medium, Large, X-Large. This type of categorical data is referred to as
ordinal. Alternatively, categorical data without a logical order is referred
to as nominal. For example, the 50 US states are categorical nominal
data.
Numerical data. Numerical data in ML refers to any type of data that
can be represented with numbers. This includes discrete data and
continuous data.
Discrete data has a countable number of values between any two values.
A discrete variable is always numeric, such as the number of customer
complaints or the number of flaws or defects.
Continuous data has an infinite number of values between any two
values. A continuous variable can be numeric or date/time, such as the
length of a part or the date and time a payment is received.
Textual data. Textual data refers to written content that can be
processed and analyzed. This can include everything from sentences and
paragraphs in articles or books to social media posts, reviews, and more.
It’s used in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks like
sentiment analysis, language translation, and text classification.
Image data. Image data consists of pixel values that can be analyzed to
extract features like edges, shapes, colors, and patterns. Image data is
often used in computer vision tasks, such as object detection, facial
recognition, and image classification.
Time-series data. Time-series data refers to a collection of
observations or measurements recorded over regular intervals of time. In
this type of data, each observation is associated with a specific timestamp
or time period, creating a sequence of data points ordered
chronologically. The order of the data points is crucial for understanding
trends, patterns, and variations occurring over that time period.
The ability to understand the different types of data is a first step toward our
goal of training an ML model. This is a necessary step considering the fact
that the data in your data lake is the combination of multiple datasets ingested
from different data sources. Each dataset may be composed of structured,
semi-structured, or unstructured data. And even if all your datasets are made
up of structured data, it is not guaranteed that the schema is the same for all
the datasets. As a result, this data needs to be properly transformed to be ready
to be fed to an ML algorithm.
This is where feature engineering comes into play. Feature engineering is the
science (and art) of extracting more information from existing data to improve
your ML model’s prediction power and help your ML model learn faster. You
are not adding any new data during featuring engineering, but rather, you are
making the data you already have more useful. By rearranging your data into a
set of features that can be fed directly into an ML algorithm, your ML model
will derive better inferences. Feature engineering often relies on domain
knowledge of the data for your ML model to produce more effective
outcomes.
The types of data you just learned (categorical, numerical, textual, image,
time-series) will determine the most appropriate feature engineering approach.
Defining Features
In ML, features are individual measurable properties or characteristics of the
data you’re analyzing. Every unique attribute of the data is considered a
feature (also known as an attribute). Think of them as inputs that your model
uses to make predictions. For example, in a dataset of sales data, features
might include the date, the number of visitors, and the number of orders
(sales).
Figure 3.2 illustrates a simplified dataset of sales data.
FIGURE 3.2 Example of a dataset.
Assume your ML model will use this data to predict sales in a given day. At
first sight, you may have noticed that the first two rows have a number of sales
significantly higher than the remaining three rows. Further analysis indicated
that customers are more prone to purchasing during weekends. As a result, it’s
the day of the week that is influencing purchasing habits. So we can engineer a
feature that calls out the day of the week and then write a simple script that
imputes that data automatically, as shown in Figure 3.3.
FIGURE 3.3 Adding a feature to a dataset.
This simple example showed how “hidden” information from your dataset can
help your ML model learn faster. Feature engineering is all about discovering
where this information is and how to transform your dataset to make the best
use of it.
Selecting Features for Model Training
The following are the main feature engineering areas of focus:
Feature extraction
Feature selection
Feature creation and transformation
The goal of feature extraction and feature selection is to reduce the
dimensionality of your dataset. The term dimensionality indicates the number
of features (or inputs) you have in your dataset. The higher the dimensionality
of a dataset, the harder the task to effectively train your ML model. Models
will be challenged to find the patterns you want them to recognize when there
are many different dimensions of data (many features) to sort through.
This is why performing feature extraction and selection is important.
Feature Extraction
Feature extraction is the process of automatically reducing the dimensionality
of your dataset by creating new features from existing features. Feature
extraction is a common process with datasets that have a large number of
features, most often seen when working with image, audio, or text data.
Figure 3.4 shows an example of image recognition.
FIGURE 3.4 Example of image recognition.
Before the introduction of neural networks, one of the ways to analyze image
datasets was to extract features from the individual images. If the image is a
car, you extract some of the useful aspects of the image like the windshield,
headlight, turn signals, and tires as independent features. So instead of having
raw pixels making up your dataset, you have features or columns such as
windshield_present and headlight_present in your dataset, as
displayed in Figure 3.5. These features will make it easier for the ML
algorithm to learn from the image data and eventually start to recognize faces.
FIGURE 3.5 Extracting features from an image.
In most cases, the data itself will help you determine what specific feature
extraction technique to use.
For image data, it might be extracting key features like we saw earlier. In NLP,
it could be extracting useful features like the most popular words from text
other than articles or prepositions.
Feature Selection
Feature selection is another technique to reduce the dimensionality of your
dataset and is commonly used in conjunction with feature extraction.
Feature selection ranks the dataset existing features according to their
predictive significance and selects only the ones that are most relevant based
on the ranking.
Because your dataset contains raw data stored in a data lake, some features
will likely be more important than others with respect to the model accuracy.
Some features will also be redundant due to data correlation to other features.
In the example in Figure 3.6, revenue shifts in parallel to sales, so it is not
likely to provide much more insight to the model than it’s already getting from
the sales data.
FIGURE 3.6 Performing feature selection.
The features that are irrelevant to the problem need to be removed. Feature
selection addresses these problems by filtering out irrelevant or redundant
features from your dataset. As a result, only a subset of features that are most
useful to the problem is made available to your ML algorithm.
Filtering algorithms may use a statistical measure to help identify features that
have a strong relationship with the target variable. In the example, the target
variable we want our ML model to predict is sales for a given day, so net
profits from sales are probably not relevant to that prediction. As a result, we
can remove that feature.
Remember, ML algorithms are not only used for typical structured datasets.
Often, we’re dealing with unstructured datasets in the form of images, audio,
or video, for instance. These types of data formats require filtering techniques
to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset.
Feature Creation and Transformation
Unlike feature extraction and selection, feature creation and transformation is
not a dimensionality reduction technique. Instead, feature creation and
transformation is the process of generating new features from existing
features. For example, say we have “date” as a feature, and it’s formatted as a
two-digit day, two-digit month, and two-digit year (dd-mm-yy).
You might find that combining the day, month, and year into one feature is not
very helpful for your predictions. Instead, you could generate three different
features, one for day, one for month, and one for year, and this way potentially
discover a meaningful relationship between one of these features and the
target variable you want your ML model to predict.
Using Amazon SageMaker Feature Store
Because features are inputs (or variables) to ML models during training,
wouldn’t it be nice to have a central location where you could select, refine,
store, and manage all the features of your dataset?
This is where Amazon SageMaker Feature Store comes into play. Amazon
SageMaker Feature Store is a fully managed repository to store, share, and
manage features for ML models. For example, in an application that
recommends books for a given topic, features could include book affinity to
the topic, book ratings, and book publishing date.
Features are constantly used by multiple teams (data scientists as well as data
and ML engineers), and feature quality is critical to the accuracy of your ML
model. Also, when features used to train models offline in batch are made
available for real-time inference, it’s hard to keep the two feature stores
synchronized. Amazon SageMaker Feature Store provides a secured and
unified store to process, standardize, and use features at scale across the ML
lifecycle.
In the next section, we will cover the preprocessing work that is necessary
prior to feature engineering. This work starts by transforming your dataset to
address inconsistency data issues, such as managing outliers, inputting missing
data, and removing duplication.
Data Cleaning and Transformation
Data cleaning is a fundamental preprocessing step that ensures your dataset is
in the best possible shape for feature engineering.
With an effective data cleaning approach, you set the stage for feature
engineering by transforming “dirty” data into a structured, accurate, and
reliable foundation. This allows you to focus on creating and selecting the
most relevant and powerful features for your ML model.
Here’s how it provides the necessary groundwork:
Managing missing values. This step addresses any gaps in your
dataset, whether by imputing missing values, deleting incomplete
records, or otherwise managing them. Clean data ensures that the features
you engineer do not suffer from bias or inaccuracies caused by gaps in
the data.
Detecting and treating outliers. By identifying and managing outliers,
you can prevent them from skewing the feature distribution and
impacting model performance. Clean data provides a more realistic
representation of the data distribution, which is crucial for effective
feature engineering.
Performing deduplication. Removing duplicate records and redundant
data points helps streamline the dataset, making feature engineering more
efficient and less prone to overfitting.
Reformatting and standardization. Ensuring uniform data types,
units, and formats allows for more straightforward feature creation. For
example, standardizing date formats and measurement units ensures
consistency and comparability across features.
Removing noise and errors. Data cleaning involves identifying and
correcting errors or inconsistencies within the data. This ensures that the
features you create are based on accurate and reliable data, leading to
more robust models.
Managing Missing Values
It is not uncommon that your dataset has missing data. For example, some
columns in your dataset may be missing values due to a data collection error,
or maybe the data was simply unavailable from your data source.
Missing data can make it difficult for the selected ML algorithm to accurately
interpret the relationship between the related feature and the target variable.
Therefore, it is important to deal with the issue.
Unfortunately, most ML algorithms cannot deal with missing values
automatically. Human knowledge is required to replace missing values with
something meaningful and relevant to the problem.
The approaches to address missing data vary based on the amount of missing
data. The main techniques are as follows:
Collect. If the amount of missing data is substantial and multiple
features are impacted, you should try to recollect the data. However, the
data ingestion process can be expensive and time-consuming. In this
case, you need to determine what the trade-offs are among the cost of
recollecting data, the cost of having a low-performance ML model, and
alternatives such as imputation or dropping.
Impute. If you are dealing with a small number of missing values,
which are randomly distributed throughout the features of your dataset,
this could be due to a failure in the data ingestion process. In this case,
imputation is likely a good option. With imputation, you populate the
missing data with the mean, the median, or the most frequent value
observed for your feature. If the data distribution for your feature is
normal, then use the mean; otherwise, use the median or the most
frequent value.
Drop. If the amount of missing data is substantial but is limited to the
same feature, you may consider dropping the entire feature. You have to
be careful, though, because when you drop too many features, you may
not have enough data to feed the ML model.
With Amazon SageMaker, you can use Python libraries like SimpleImputer
from sklearn to fill in missing values. The following snippet shows how this
function works:
from sklearn.impute import SimpleImputer
import numpy as np
    
# Create a sample dataset
A = np.array([[1, 2], [None, 4], [5, None]])
    
# Create a SimpleImputer object
imputer = SimpleImputer(strategy=‘mean’)
    
# Fit and transform the data
B = imputer.fit_transform(A)
     
print(B)
The following input array
[[1, 2], [None, 4], [5, None]]
has been transformed into this:
[[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 3]]
AWS Glue DataBrew can also be used to fill missing values using a number of
built-in transformations.
Detecting and Treating Outliers
An outlier is a data point in your dataset distinct from all other data points for
having a significant deviation from the mean.
What does “significantly” mean, exactly? Although the answer depends on the
type of data and its probability distribution, the general consensus is that a
data point is considered an outlier if it lies more than three standard deviations
away from the mean. This is based on the properties of the normal
distribution, where approximately 99.7% of data lies within three standard
deviations from the mean.
ML algorithms are very sensitive to the distribution and the range of the
values of your features. Because outliers drift from the pattern of all other data
points, they have a tendency to mislead the ML algorithm during training.
For example, consider the following dataset:
[x,y] = [[4, 11], [3.8, 12], [4.5, 12.5], [8, 8], [9, 
8.5], [9.5, 7.5], [13, 5], [14, 4.7], [13.7, 6], [25, 23]]
In this example, assume x indicates your water consumption rate per day,
whereas y indicates the energy consumption rate per day. These numbers are
just for illustration purposes.
As you can see in Figure 3.7, this dataset is distributed in three groups.
FIGURE 3.7 Example of an outlier.
One data point clearly stands out and is acting as an outlier.
Although some outliers are caused by artificial errors, others just appear in
your dataset as a result of natural phenomena. A natural outlier is not the result
of some artificial error but instead is reflective of some truth in the data.
Your job as an ML engineer is to determine whether an outlier should stay in
your dataset or needs to be changed or removed. You make this decision by
leveraging statistical techniques that help you understand how relevant the
outlier is with respect to the other data points in your dataset.
It is important to distinguish between noise and outliers. The former denotes a
group of erroneous data points, whereas the latter refers to data points that
significantly deviate from the mean of your dataset. In the rest of the chapters,
you will learn how to leverage the extensive ecosystem of AWS ML services
to determine what “significantly” means.
The treatment of outliers relies on three main approaches:
Delete. If outliers are due to noise or artificial errors, you can simply
delete them from your dataset without impacting the quality and the
accuracy of your ML model.
Logarithmic transform. By replacing the outlier with its logarithm in
a given base (e.g., base , base 2, base 10, and so on), you are
compressing the range of values for a feature, resulting in a reduction of
the extreme variation between the values. As a result, the outlier won’t be
too far off from the other values for that feature. For example, the
logarithm base 10 (
) of 1000 is 3. That’s because 
,
which brings it closer to other smaller values without losing its
significance.
Impute. Just as for missing values, you could use the mean of the
feature, for instance, and impute that value to replace the outlier value.
This would be an excellent approach if the outlier was caused by artificial
errors.
Outliers often create a skewed distribution, as shown in Figure 3.7. Log
transformation can help normalize this distribution, making it more
symmetrical and improving the performance of your ML model.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the same dataset after representing the ordinate axis y
using a logarithmic scale. The outlier data point [25, 23] has x = 25 and y
= 23. Because 
, you can see how this data point
no longer deviates significantly from the mean.
FIGURE 3.8 Outlier treatment with logarithmic transformation.
For the exam, you need to know the AWS services that help you detect and
treat outliers, which are Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler and AWS Glue
DataBrew.
You can use Amazon SageMaker Jupyter notebooks to load your dataset using
Python libraries like pandas.
To determine which outlier detection algorithm to use, you need to analyze the
histogram for each feature. Figure 3.9 illustrates the histograms for our dataset
generated using the following Python snippet:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
     
# Load dataset
data = np.array([[4, 11], [3.8, 12], [4.5, 12.5], [8, 8], 
[9, 8.5], [9.5, 7.5], [13, 5], [14, 4.7], [13.7, 6], [25, 
23]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
      
# Plot histograms
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 5))
     
plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)
sns.histplot(df[‘Feature1’], kde=True)
plt.title(‘Water Usage Distribution (m³/day)’)
     
plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)
sns.histplot(df[‘Feature2’], kde=True)
plt.title(‘Energy Usage Distribution (kWh/day)’)
    
plt.show()
FIGURE 3.9 Histograms for water and energy usage.
In Figure 3.9, the histograms show a right-skewed data distribution for both
features. A right-skewed data distribution means that the majority of our data
points are clustered toward the lower end of the range, with a long tail
extending to the right. This tail represents a small number of data points that
have much higher values than the rest of the dataset. Essentially, most values
are low, and only a few are exceptionally high, which is exactly our scenario
with the data point [25, 23] representing the highest value pair.
For skewed data, the interquartile range (IQR) method is often considered one
of the best approaches for detecting outliers. The IQR is less affected by
skewness and provides a robust measure to identify extreme values.
Assuming 
 and 
 denote the first and the third quartiles of our dataset,
here’s a quick overview of how it works:
Compute 
 and 
.
Compute 
. 
Any data point whose value is smaller than 
 or greater than 
 is considered an outlier.
In our example, we can leverage the built-in quantile method, available
from the DataFrame class in both the numpy and pandas libraries, to detect
outliers from the dataset, as illustrated in the following snippet:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
    
# Load dataset
data = np.array([[4, 11], [3.8, 12], [4.5, 12.5], [8, 8], 
[9, 8.5], [9.5, 7.5], [13, 5], [14, 4.7], [13.7, 6], [25, 
23]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
    
# Calculate IQR
Q1 = df.quantile(0.25)
Q3 = df.quantile(0.75)
IQR = Q3 - Q1
     
# Define outlier conditions
outliers = ((df < (Q1 - 1.5 * IQR)) | (df > (Q3 + 1.5 * 
IQR))).any(axis=1)
df[‘Outlier’] = outliers
     
print(“Original Data with Outlier Flags:”)
print(df)
    
# Treat outliers by removing them
df_cleaned = df[~df[‘Outlier’]].drop(columns=‘Outlier’)
    
print(“\nCleaned Data without Outliers:”)
print(df_cleaned)
This program produces the output shown in Figure 3.10, where you can see
how the script detected the data point [25, 23] as an outlier and
subsequently removed it.
FIGURE 3.10 Detecting and treating outliers.
For normally distributed data, the Z-score method is highly effective for
detecting outliers. Here’s a quick rundown:
Compute the mean 
 of your dataset.
Compute the standard deviation  of your dataset.
For each data point , the Z-score 
.
Because a normal distribution is characterized by the following,
One standard deviation covers around 68% of the data.
Two standard deviations covers around 95% of the data.
Three standard deviations covers around 99.7% of the data.
data points with Z-scores greater than 3 or less than –3 are considered outliers.
In other words, it is statistically safe to assume the 0.3% data points whose Z-
score is greater than 3 or less than –3 are far enough from the mean to be
considered outliers.
The Z-score outlier detection method can also be calculated programmatically.
The following snippet shows you how:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from scipy import stats
     
# Load dataset
data = np.array([[4, 11], [3.8, 12], [4.5, 12.5], [8, 8], 
[9, 8.5], [9.5, 7.5], [13, 5], [14, 4.7], [13.7, 6], [25, 
23]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
     
# Detect outliers using Z-score
z_scores = np.abs(stats.zscore(df))
outliers = (z_scores > 3).any(axis=1)
df[‘Outlier’] = outliers
      
print(“Original Data with Outlier Flags:”)
print(df)
     
# Treat outliers by removing them
df_cleaned = df[~df[‘Outlier’]].drop(columns=‘Outlier’)
     
print(“\nCleaned Data without Outliers:”)
print(df_cleaned)
The preceding code produces the output represented in Figure 3.11.
FIGURE 3.11 Failing outlier detection.
As you can see, the Z-score method failed to detect the outlier [25, 23].
This is because the distribution of data points in our dataset is not normal, but
it’s right-skewed.
With AWS Glue DataBrew, you can also detect outliers in your data and
handle them using various transformations. This approach includes replacing,
removing, rescaling, or flagging outliers using the methods you just learned,
i.e., Z-score and IQRs.
Performing Deduplication
Deduplication is the process to remove duplicate data points from your
dataset. Deduplication is not just about tidying up your data—it’s about
making your models more accurate, more performant, and more reliable.
From a data quality standpoint, duplicate data can skew the results and lead to
inaccurate predictions. Removing duplicates ensures that the data used to train
models is clean and accurate.
Model performance and reliability are key factors to be accounted for in the
model evaluation and deployment phases of the ML lifecycle. Duplicates can
cause overfitting, where the model learns noise rather than the signal. Clean,
deduplicated data helps create more generalizable models.
From a reliability standpoint, duplicates can introduce bias, particularly if
certain entries are repeated more often than others, leading to imbalanced
training data.
As a result, an effective deduplication strategy is critical to ensuring the
quality of your ML model training data.
For simplicity and ease of use, AWS Glue DataBrew is probably your best bet
for removing duplicates from your dataset. AWS Glue DataBrew offers a
straightforward, visual interface to clean and prepare your data without the
need for complex code. AWS Glue DataBrew is user-friendly and efficient,
making data cleaning tasks like removing duplicates quick and hassle-free.
Standardizing and Reformatting
By implementing standardization, you are preventing features with large
values from disproportionately impacting the model compared to features with
smaller values. This technique is particularly important for ML algorithms that
are sensitive to feature scales, like linear regression and support vector
machines, which will be covered in the next chapter.
Reformatting in ML means restructuring your data into a consistent and
suitable format for analysis. It includes converting data types, harmonizing
formats, and ensuring all data entries follow the same structure.
To perform standardization and reformatting with AWS, you can use Amazon
SageMaker and AWS Glue. The main steps are outlined here:
Load data. You can use SageMaker notebooks to load your dataset
from an S3 bucket, as shown in the following snippet:
import pandas as pd
data = pd.read_csv(‘your_dataset.csv’)
Standardize data.  You can use the StandardScaler class from the
sklearn. preprocessing module to standardize your features, as
shown in the following snippet:
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
scaler = StandardScaler()
data_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(data)
More normalization and standardization techniques will be covered in the
upcoming sections.
Export data. You can save the standardized dataset to S3.
Create AWS Glue job.  Create an AWS Glue job to reformat the data
as needed.
Load clean data.  Use the cleaned and standardized data to train your
ML model.
Removing Noise and Errors
Natural noise and artificial errors were briefly introduced earlier. Because the
primary goal of feature engineering is to produce the best possible amount of
training data for your ML model, one of the key aspects of this process is the
ability to handle noise and errors.
By creating new features or transforming existing ones, you make the training
data more informative and relevant for your ML model. This process helps
improve model accuracy, efficiency, and generalization, which will result in an
increased predictive power of your model.
A model trained on noisy data often learns specific quirks or errors present in
the training dataset rather than the underlying patterns. This leads to
overfitting, where the model performs very well on training data but poorly on
new, unseen data. By properly handling noise and errors, you help ensure the
model generalizes better to real-world scenarios. We will cover in detail
methods to address overfitting in Chapter 5.
Feature Engineering Techniques
In the previous section, the methods to clean your dataset were introduced.
Data cleaning is a preliminary step toward preparing your training data for
your model.
The objective of the next step is effectively transforming the raw data into
meaningful features that improve the performance of your ML model. This is
feature engineering’s main focus. Ultimately, after feature engineering, your
ML model will be ready for training.
Mastering feature engineering is crucial to demonstrate your expertise in
building and deploying scalable and efficient ML solutions on AWS. The
upcoming sections will cover the feature engineering techniques you need to
know for the exam.
We will start with techniques for structured data, and then we will proceed
with techniques for unstructured data in the form of images, text, and time-
series.
Techniques for Structured Data
With structured data, you can use a number of feature extraction techniques to
reduce the dimensionality of your dataset. One of the things you should be
careful of when you use feature extraction is that when you put this model into
production or automate the pipeline, these features can be replicated easily but
still reduce the high dimensions in the data.
Feature Engineering for Numerical Data
Numerical data is ultimately the type of data you want to feed your ML model.
Whether your data is categorical, textual, or image, your feature engineering
outcomes will need to be in the form of a distinct and well-organized set of
numbers that can be used to train your ML algorithm.
The way you engineer these set of numbers into meaningful features may have
a significant impact on your model performance and accuracy.
In the upcoming sections, we will dive into the feature engineering concepts
previously introduced.
Normalization
Normalization is an approach to feature engineering that brings numerical data
for all your features into a consistent scale, usually between 0 and 1. This has
several key benefits:
Equal weighting. Normalization ensures that no single feature
dominates the model due to its scale. This is particularly important for
ML algorithms that are sensitive to the scale of your data, such as k-
nearest neighbors (k-NN) and neural networks, which compute distances
between data points.
Faster convergence. In gradient descent optimization, normalized data
helps the ML algorithm converge faster by ensuring that all features
contribute equally to the gradient. This leads to more efficient training
and better performance for your ML model.
Enhanced interpretability. Normalized data makes it easier to
interpret feature importance and model coefficients, as all features are on
a comparable scale.
This technique is useful when you want your data to be on a common scale but
it doesn’t necessarily need to be centered around zero.
As a result of normalization, ML models perform better when all features of
your dataset are on the same scale. Normalization can lead to higher accuracy
and stability, especially in distance-based algorithms.
Normalization is typically implemented with the MinMax scaler function,
which will be covered in detail in the upcoming “Scaling” section.
Standardization
Standardization transforms features to have a mean of 0 and a standard
deviation of 1. It’s used when you want to ensure that your feature data is
centered around the mean ( ) and scaled according to the standard deviation (
).
This technique is ideal for ML algorithms that assume normally distributed
data, such as linear regression, logistic regression, or algorithms that use
gradient descent.
You implement standardization by using the Z-score function.
Z-score. This solution transforms the feature dataset to have a mean of
0 and a standard deviation of 1 with the following formula:
where
 is your feature data point.
 is the mean of your feature dataset.
 is the standard deviation of your feature dataset.
The resulting standard deviation is 1 because of the nature of the
transformation.
When you subtract the mean ( ) from each data point ( ), you center the data
around 0. Each data point is adjusted relative to the average value of the
dataset.
Dividing by the standard deviation ( ) scales the data points relative to the
spread of the data. This step ensures that the variance (which is the square of
the standard deviation) of the standardized data becomes 1.
Scaling
Scaling is the general term for adjusting the range or distribution of features.
Because normalization’s main concern is the range of the transformed dataset
(scale 0 to 1 for all features), whereas standardization is focused on
distribution (0 as mean , and 1 as standard deviation  of the transformed
dataset), these two techniques you just learned are part of scaling.
If your feature data is not normally distributed, you need techniques that
handle skewness or outliers differently from Z-score standardization. The ones
you need to know for the exam are as follows:
Robust scaling. Robust scaling centers the feature dataset by
subtracting the median and scales it according to the IQR. This makes it
particularly useful for datasets with outliers, as it ensures the central
tendency and spread are robust to them. As a result, this standardization
technique is less sensitive to outliers and works well with skewed data.
You can use the RobustScaler class from the sklearn.preprocessing
module to scale your features with this technique, as shown in the following
example:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.preprocessing import RobustScaler
     
# Load dataset
data = np.array([[4, 11], [3.8, 12], [4.5, 12.5], [8, 8], 
[9, 8.5], [9.5, 7.5], [13, 5], [14, 4.7], [13.7, 6], [25, 
23]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
     
# Apply RobustScaler
scaler = RobustScaler()
data_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(df)
      
# Convert the scaled data back to a DataFrame for easier 
viewing
df_scaled = pd.DataFrame(data_scaled, columns=[‘Feature1’, 
‘Feature2’])
     
print(“Original Data:”)
print(df)
print(“\nScaled Data:”)
print(df_scaled)
The preceding code produces the output represented in Figure 3.12.
FIGURE 3.12 Robust scaling.
As you can see in Figure 3.12, with robust scaling the scaled data frame is less
sensitive to outliers than the original data frame. As a result of the
transformation, outliers like [25, 23] don’t skew the new dataset for your
feature.
MinMax scaling. This standardization technique transforms features to
a fixed range, usually between 0 and 1. This technique preserves the
relationships between the features but does not address skewness.
You can use the MinMaxScaler class from the sklearn.preprocessing
module to scale your features with this approach, as shown in the following
snippet:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
     
# Sample data
data = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6], [7, 8], [−1, −2], 
[−3, −4]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
      
# Initialize MinMaxScaler
scaler = MinMaxScaler()
      
# Fit and Transform
data_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(df)
df_scaled = pd.DataFrame(data_scaled, columns=[‘Feature1’, 
‘Feature2’])
     
# Print results
print(“Original Data:\n”, df)
print(“\nScaled Data:\n”, df_scaled)
MaxAbs scaling. MaxAbs scaling is a technique used to standardize
data by scaling each feature data point to its maximum absolute value. As
a result, each data point falls within the range [−1, 1].
This technique is best suited to standardize sparse datasets or datasets with
many 0 data points, because it preserves 0 entries while maintaining the
original data distribution.
You can use the MaxAbsScaler class from the sklearn.preprocessing
module to scale your features with this approach, as shown in the following
snippet:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.preprocessing import MaxAbsScaler
      
# Sample data
data = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6], [7, 8], [−1, −2], 
[−3, −4]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
      
# Initialize MaxAbsScaler
scaler = MaxAbsScaler()
       
# Fit and Transform
data_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(df)
df_scaled = pd.DataFrame(data_scaled, columns=[‘Feature1’, 
‘Feature2’])
       
# Print results
print(“Original Data:\n”, df)
print(“\nScaled Data:\n”, df_scaled)
Power transformations (Box-Cox, Yeo-Johnson). The variance of a
dataset is the square of the standard deviation (
). By definition, the
variance is always a positive number and measures the spread of data
points in a dataset, telling you how far each point is from the mean ( ).
Mathematically, it’s the average of the squared differences from the
mean. A high variance means data points are spread out from the mean; a
low variance means they are close to the mean.
Power transformations help stabilize variance and make data more normally
distributed. Two common types are the Box-Cox transformation and the Yeo-
Johnson transformation. The former works only on positive data, whereas the
latter handles both positive and negative data.
You can use the PowerTransformer class from the
sklearn.preprocessing module to scale your features with this approach,
as shown in the following snippet:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.preprocessing import PowerTransformer
      
# Sample data
data = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6], [7, 8], [−1, −2], 
[−3, −4]])
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[‘Feature1’, ‘Feature2’])
     
# Initialize Yeo-Johnson Transformation
pt = PowerTransformer(method=‘yeo-johnson’)
      
# Fit and Transform
data_scaled = pt.fit_transform(df)
df_scaled = pd.DataFrame(data_scaled, columns=[‘Feature1’, 
‘Feature2’])
      
# Print results
print(“Original Data:\n”, df)
print(“\nScaled Data:\n”, df_scaled)
Power transformations make your data more suitable for modeling by
reducing skewness and stabilizing variance, leading to more robust and
accurate models.
Logarithmic Transformation
As you learned previously, logarithmic transformation is a method to detect
and manage outliers. It helps as a feature engineering technique for numerical
data by reducing skewness, limiting the impact of outliers, and enhancing
linear relationships. Here’s how:
Reducing skewness. Many real-world datasets are right-skewed,
meaning most data points cluster around lower values with a few outliers
extending the “tail” toward higher values. Common examples include
income distribution, where a small number of high earners create a long
right tail, or test scores on a difficult exam where most students score
lower with a few high achievers at the top. Applying a logarithmic
transformation compresses this tail, making the distribution more
symmetrical and closer to a normal distribution, which many ML
algorithms handle better.
Limiting the impact of outliers. High-value outliers can dominate and
distort the scale of numerical data. Logarithmic transformation reduces
the magnitude of these outliers, bringing them closer to the bulk of the
data without outright removal.
Enhancing linear relationships. For some data, the relationship
between features and the target variable may be multiplicative or
exponential rather than linear. Logarithmic transformation can linearize
these relationships, making it easier for linear models to capture the
underlying patterns.
For example, consider the following dataset:
[x,y] = [[3, 1], [4, 10], [5, 100], [6, 1000]]
By transforming  to the 
, the new dataset becomes as follows:
[x,y] = [[3, 0], [4, 1], [5, 2], [6, 3]]
By converting the data to a logarithmic scale, variations become more
manageable, and the overall structure of the data is clearer. This
transformation can significantly boost the performance and accuracy of many
models.
Logarithmic transformation can’t be directly applied to features with
values of 0 or negative numbers because the logarithm of 0 and negative
numbers is undefined, regardless of its base. In such scenarios, consider
shifting your data to ensure all values are positive numbers, or use
alternative transformations (e.g., cube root), which might be more suitable
for your data.
Square or Cube Root
To handle high variance in numeric datasets (in addition to the power
transformation covered earlier), consider using square-root or cube-root
transformations. The square and cube root of a feature have an effect on the
feature distribution. However, that impact is not as significant as logarithmic
transformation. The cube root has its own advantage. It can be applied to
negative values including 0. The square root can be applied only to positive
values and 0.
Binning
Binning (also referred to as bucketing) is the process of dividing numerical,
continuous data into discrete intervals or “bins.” This technique can simplify
ML model development and make models more robust to outliers and noise.
With binning, you transform numerical data into categorical data.
For example, if you’re looking at automobiles data, you can convert the
vehicle weight into five columns: is_minicompact, is_subcompact,
is_compact, is_midsize, and is_large.
Feature Engineering for Categorical Data
Categorical data can capture important information about the relationships and
characteristics of your data that numerical data might miss. Properly
engineered categorical features can significantly enhance the performance of
your ML models.
Feature engineering for categorical data starts with encoding, which is the
process of transforming your feature data from string format to a numerical
format. The numerical format may be an integer, an array of integers, a matrix,
or even a tensor of integers. Encoding is performed to allow ML algorithms to
interpret and use this data as input, as most algorithms only understand
numerical values.
For example, if your categories are White, Black, and Red, you may encode
this data into three vectors: [1, 0, 0] to represent White, [0, 1, 0] to
represent Black, and [0, 0, 1] to represent Red.
Label Encoding
Label encoding—as the name suggests—labels each category of your
categorical feature to a unique integer. For example, the categorical feature
“Color” with values like this
[“White”, “Black”, “Red”]
becomes this
[0, 1, 2]
Although simple, this technique can be problematic for algorithms that assume
ordered relationships in data, as it imposes an ordinal structure on categorical
values.
This encoding technique is best suited for tree-based ML algorithms because
these algorithms can handle the ordinal relationship implied by label encoding.
One-Hot Encoding
One-hot encoding converts a categorical feature into a set of binary features,
where each binary feature represents one possible category, with a value of 1
if the category is present and 0 if it’s not.
You can use the OneHotEncoder class from the sklearn.preprocessing
module to encode your features with this approach, as shown in the following
snippet:
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.preprocessing import OneHotEncoder
     
# Sample data
data = {‘Color’: [‘White’, ‘Black’, ‘Red’, ‘Blue’, 
‘Green’, ‘Yellow’, ‘Pink’, ‘Brown’, ‘White’, ‘Black’]}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
     
# Initialize OneHotEncoder
encoder = OneHotEncoder(sparse_output=False)
       
# Fit and transform the data
one_hot = encoder.fit_transform(df[[‘Color’]])
      
# Convert to DataFrame for easier viewing
one_hot_df = pd.DataFrame(one_hot, 
columns=encoder.get_feature_names_out([‘Color’]))
     
# Print results
print(“Original Data:\n”, df)
print(“\nOne-Hot Encoded Data:\n”, one_hot_df)
Figure 3.13 shows the result produced by this program.
FIGURE 3.13 One-hot encoding.
As you can see, the original dataset had one categorical feature, “Color,” with
10 data points (categories): White, Black, Red, Blue, Green, Yellow, Pink,
Brown, White, and Black.
The one-hot encoded dataset has been transformed into eight numerical
features, equal to the number of distinct colors: Color_Black, Color_Blue,
Color_Brown, Color_Green, Color_Pink, Color_Red, Color_White, and
Color_Yellow. Each of them has 10 data points.
One-hot encoding is a good choice for features with a small set of categorical
data and for non-tree-based ML algorithms, such as linear regression, k-NN,
and neural networks. These algorithms will be covered in the next chapter.
One-hot encoding increases the dimensionality of your feature dataset.
This can become a problem, especially when dealing with high-cardinality
features (those with many unique categories). However, the impact largely
depends on the ML algorithm you’re using and the nature of your data.
You can mitigate the risk of high dimensionality by performing techniques
like binary encoding instead, as explained in the next section. Another
approach is to use the principal component analysis (PCA) algorithm after
one-hot encoding. See Chapter 4 for more information.
Binary Encoding
Binary encoding is an effective technique to handle categorical data without
“exploding” the dimensionality of your feature dataset as one-hot encoding
might. It works by converting each category value to its corresponding binary
number and then splitting the binary number into individual bits as separate
features (columns).
Think of binary encoding as a way to compact the number of features resulting
from the one-hot-encoding technique.
In the following example, we used the BinaryEncoder class from the
category_encoders module to binary-encode the same dataset in the
previous example:
import category_encoders as ce
import pandas as pd
      
# Sample data
data = {‘Color’: [‘White’, ‘Black’, ‘Red’, ‘Blue’, 
‘Green’, ‘Yellow’, ‘Pink’, ‘Brown’, ‘White’, ‘Black’]}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
      
# Initialize Binary Encoder
encoder = ce.BinaryEncoder(cols=[‘Color’])
      
# Fit and Transform the data
df_binary_encoded = encoder.fit_transform(df)
      
# Print results
print(“Original Data:\n”, df)
print(“\nBinary Encoded Data:\n”, df_binary_encoded)
Figure 3.14 displays the output of this transformation.
FIGURE 3.14 Binary encoding.
As a result of binary-encoding our 10 non-distinct categories, the new dataset
has only four numerical features (instead of eight).
Why four? Because the original dataset had eight distinct categories, which
can be represented in binary format using four bits. Notice how the number of
data points (10) doesn’t change upon transforming the data.
Binary encoding is best suited to address the shortcomings of one-hot
encoding, because it mitigates the dimensionality “explosion” resulting from
creating one new feature for each unique category.
However, when compared to one-hot encoding, binary encoding can lead to a
loss of information within categorical data, which could have a negative
impact on your model performance. This is because binary encoding
compresses categorical data into fewer bits, causing distinctions between
categories to be blurred.
Feature Hashing
This technique uses a hash function to convert high-cardinality categorical
data into a fixed number of numerical features that you, as an ML engineer,
get to choose.
Feature hashing is efficient and highly scalable because the result of the
transformation is a fixed-size vector, keeping memory usage in check. Here’s
how it works at a high level:
Input feature. The feature hash function receives a feature value,
which could be a word, a category, or any other identifiable attribute
from your data.
Hash function application. The feature is processed by the hash
function, which returns a unique integer value (hash value) based on the
value of the feature.
Modulo operation (optional). To ensure the hash value falls within the
desired range (usually the size of the feature vector), the hash value is
often taken modulo a predefined number.
Vector update. The calculated hash value is used as an index to update
the corresponding element in the feature vector.
By leveraging a hash function, this approach transforms data rapidly, thus
making it suitable for large datasets. Although collisions can occur, the
aggregation of values usually mitigates the impact, especially with large
enough hash buckets.
As a result, feature hashing strikes a balance between preserving information
and maintaining computational efficiency. It is an excellent solution to feature
engineer high-cardinality categorical data in an efficient yet cost-effective
manner.
You can use the FeatureHasher class from the sklearn.
feature_extraction module to hash your features with this approach, as
shown in the following snippet:
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.feature_extraction import FeatureHasher
     
# Sample data
data = [{‘Color’: ‘White’}, {‘Color’: ‘Black’}, {‘Color’: 
‘Red’}, {‘Color’: ‘Blue’}, {‘Color’: ‘Green’}, {‘Color’: 
‘Yellow’}, {‘Color’: ‘Pink’}, {‘Color’: ‘Brown’}, 
{‘Color’: ‘White’}, {‘Color’: ‘Black’}]
         
# Convert to DataFrame for viewing before transformation
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
        
print(“Original Data:”)
print(df)
       
# Initialize FeatureHasher
hasher = FeatureHasher(n_features=3, input_type=‘dict’)
      
# Fit and transform the data
hashed_features = hasher.transform(data)
      
# Convert the hashed features to a DataFrame for easier 
viewing
hashed_df = pd.DataFrame(hashed_features.toarray(), 
columns=[f’feature_{i}’ for i in 
range(hashed_features.shape[1])])
       
print(“\nHashed Data:”)
print(hashed_df)
Figure 3.15 displays the hashed features generated by this program.
FIGURE 3.15 Feature hashing.
Notice how the FeatureHasher class applies feature hashing to convert the
categorical data (10 categories) into a fixed-size vector for each category. In
this example, we set the number of features in the constructor of the
FeatureHasher class. This number has been set to 3.
As a result, the 10 categories have been hashed into 10 vectors. Each vector
comprises of three integers, one for each of the three features.
Feature Engineering for Time-Series Data
Time-series data was introduced at the beginning of this chapter and is
different from standard tabular data because it is captured repeatedly over
time, with each successive data point dependent on its past values. Think of a
time series like watching a movie—each scene depends on the previous ones.
The time dimension plays a key role in time-series data.
Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler provides a low-code solution to time-
series data processing with the ability to clean, transform, and prepare data
faster. It also enables data scientists to engineer time-series data in adherence
to their forecasting model’s input format requirements.
To perform feature engineering on a time-series dataset, we need first to
understand the patterns present in our dataset. Amazon SageMaker Data
Wrangler offers a number of visualizations, which provide valuable leads to
data scientists and analysts into existing patterns and can help you choose a
modeling strategy. After we understand the patterns present in our dataset, we
can start to engineer new features aimed at increasing the accuracy of the
forecasting models.
Featurize Datetime
It’s best practice to start the feature engineering process for time-series data by
disambiguating date/time features. Date/time features are created from the
timestamp column and provide an optimal way for ML engineers to start the
feature engineering process. The Featurize datetime time-series
transformation lets us break down a date/time feature by adding the
date_month, date_day, date_week_of_year, date_day_of_year, and
date_quarter new features to our dataset. Because we’re providing the
date/time components as separate features, we enable ML algorithms to detect
patterns for improving prediction accuracy.
Encode Categorical
Date/time features aren’t limited to integer values. You may also choose to
consider certain extracted date/time features as categorical variables and
represent them as one-hot-encoded features, with each column containing
binary values. To do so, leverage the One-hot encode transformation. The
newly created date_quarter feature contains values from 0 to 3 and can be
one-hot encoded using four binary columns, one column for each of the four
quarters.
Lag Feature
To increase model accuracy, it is best practice to create lag features for the
target variable (or label). Lag features are values at prior timestamps that are
helpful in predicting future values. They also help identify autocorrelation
(also known as serial correlation) patterns in the residual series by quantifying
the relationship of the observation with observations at previous time steps.
Autocorrelation is similar to regular correlation but between the values in a
series and its past values. Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler provides the
Lag features transformation, which helps create multiple lag features over a
specified window size.
Rolling Window Features
Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler implements automatic time-series feature
extraction capabilities using the open-source tsfresh package. With the
time-series feature extraction transformation, you can automate the feature
extraction process. This eliminates the time and effort otherwise spent
manually implementing signal processing libraries. For the exam, you need to
know that features can be extracted using the Rolling window features
transformation, which computes statistical properties across a set of
observations defined by the window size.
After feature engineering the time-series dataset, we are ready to use the
transformed dataset as input for a forecasting ML algorithm.
Techniques for Unstructured Data
Unstructured data, such as images, text, audio, and videos, doesn’t fit neatly
into tables and often lacks a predefined format. AWS offers a comprehensive
ecosystem of products and services that make feature engineering for
unstructured data more manageable and efficient.
In the upcoming sections, we will cover the techniques you need to know for
the exam that apply to image and textual data.
Feature Engineering for Image Data
Just like structured data, feature engineering for image data is a critical step in
developing effective ML models. This process involves extracting meaningful
features from images, such as edges, textures, and colors, to improve the
performance of image recognition and classification tasks by providing the
model with more relevant information about the data.
For example, at the beginning of the chapter, we used an image of a car
(Figure 3.4) to show you what features could be extracted from this
unstructured data.
To perform feature extraction on images, you primarily leverage pre-trained
vision models within Amazon SageMaker JumpStart, often by processing
them through a convolutional neural network (CNN) and retrieving the
resulting feature vectors. These pre-trained vision models include models for
object detection, image classification, and many others.
You can also use services like Amazon Rekognition for basic image analysis
and feature extraction, depending on your use case. Amazon Rekognition can
detect objects, scenes, text, and faces in images, providing high-level features
without the need for extensive manual effort. For instance, Amazon
Rekognition can identify and extract features such as labels and bounding
boxes around objects, which are essential for tasks like object detection and
image classification.
Once features are extracted, transforming them into a suitable format is
essential. Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler allows you to perform
exploratory data analysis (EDA) and apply transformations like normalization
and dimensionality reduction. This step ensures your features are optimized
for model training. For example, you can normalize pixel values to a common
scale or apply PCA to reduce the dimensionality of your feature set.
Efficiently storing and managing your engineered features is crucial for
streamlined workflows. As you learned at the beginning of the chapter,
Amazon SageMaker Feature Store provides a centralized repository for feature
storage, making it easy to share and reuse features across different models and
projects. This ensures consistency and saves time, as you don’t have to re-
extract features for every new model.
Feature Engineering for Textual Data
In today’s data-driven world, textual data is everywhere, from social media
posts to customer reviews and beyond. Extracting meaningful insights from
this unstructured data requires effective feature engineering. AWS provides a
powerful ecosystem of products and services to streamline this process and
turn raw text into valuable features for ML models.
Amazon Comprehend is a powerful tool for extracting high-level features
from text. It can detect entities, key phrases, sentiment, and language,
providing rich insights without extensive manual effort. Additionally, Amazon
Textract can extract text from documents, turning unstructured data into
structured information.
For more customized feature extraction, Amazon SageMaker offers built-in
algorithms and frameworks. These algorithms can be used to train models and
extract specific features like word embeddings (e.g., Word2Vec) or perform
topic modeling (e.g., Latent Dirichlet Allocation). These algorithms will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
The following are some essential techniques you need to know for the exam.
Tokenization
Tokenization is the process of splitting text into smaller units, such as words
or phrases, called tokens. This is the first step in preparing text data for
modeling.
For example, the sentence “Machine learning is fascinating” is
tokenized into [“Machine”, “learning”, “is”, “fascinating”].
Tokenization is a key component used by Amazon Bedrock foundation models
(FMs) to understand and process user prompts. By breaking down the input
text into smaller tokens, these models can effectively interpret the meaning
and context of the user’s request. For example, a prompt like “Generate an
image of a sunset” would be divided into individual words and symbols,
allowing the model to analyze each element and understand the overall
directive. This token-based approach ensures that the model can handle
complex and nuanced instructions with high accuracy and relevance.
Moreover, tokenization plays a key role in the pricing model for using
Amazon Bedrock FMs. The cost of utilizing these models is determined by the
number of input tokens processed and the output tokens generated. This token-
based billing system ensures that users are charged fairly based on the actual
computational resources consumed. For example, a longer and more detailed
prompt would require more tokens and thus incur a higher cost compared to a
shorter, simpler prompt. In Chapter 4, we will introduce a practical example
demonstrating how to generate an image from a simple prompt using an FM
available in Amazon Bedrock, showcasing the efficiency and effectiveness of
token-based processing.
Stop-Words Removal
Stop words are common words (e.g., “the”, “is”, “and”) that often do not
contribute meaningful information. Removing them can reduce noise and
improve model performance.
For example, removing “is” and “the” from “The cat is on the mat”
would result in [“cat”, “on”, “mat”].
Stemming and Lemmatization
These techniques reduce words to their base or root form. Stemming cuts off
prefixes/suffixes, whereas lemmatization uses linguistic rules.
For example, “running” becomes “run”.
N-grams
N-grams are contiguous sequences of n items from a given text. They capture
context and relationships between words.
For example, for a bi-gram (i.e., a contiguous sequence of two words), the
sentence “Machine learning is fun” is transformed to [(“Machine”,
“learning”), (“learning”, “is”), (“is”, “fun”)].
Word Embeddings
Word embeddings like Word2Vec and GloVe convert words into continuous
vectors that capture semantic meaning, preserving relationships between
words. This makes the data more suitable for ML models.
For example, “King” and “Queen” might be close in vector space, reflecting
their semantic similarity.
Data Labeling
In the realm of ML, data labeling and feature engineering are two intertwined
processes that are fundamental to building effective models. They both
transform raw data into a structured form that ML algorithms can understand
and learn from.
Feature engineering is focused on selecting, modifying, and creating new
features from raw data to improve model performance, whereas data labeling
involves enriching raw data with metadata in the form of meaningful labels
that denote the actual predictions or specific attributes. For supervised
learning, this step is fundamental as it provides the ground truth that models
learn from. By labeling data, you provide the model with the “correct
answers” to learn from and predict against.
Labels act as a reference point, guiding the learning process of algorithms.
They define what the model is supposed to predict or classify. For example, in
a dataset of animal images, labeling each image as “cat” or “dog” allows the
model to learn to distinguish between these animals.
Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth
With AWS, you perform data labeling using Amazon SageMaker Ground
Truth, a service specifically designed to streamline and enhance the data
labeling process. This service combines advanced automation with human-in-
the-loop capabilities to deliver high-quality labeled datasets efficiently. Here is
the high-level process:
Store data. Upload your raw data (images, text, etc.) to Amazon S3.
Create separate folders or buckets to organize your data based on the type
or project.
Create a labeling job. In Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth, define
the task and instructions.
Automated labeling. Choose the type of data you are labeling (e.g.,
image classification, text classification, object detection), and specify the
input dataset stored in S3. Select Automated Data Labeling to use pre-
trained ML models to label a subset of your data, and configure the
labeling algorithm settings and parameters.
Human review. Annotators review and correct the labels, ensuring
accuracy. This step can be performed by Amazon Mechanical Turk, a
private workforce, or third-party vendors. Amazon Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) is a crowdsourcing marketplace that connects businesses with a
global workforce of workers to complete tasks that are difficult for
computers to do, data labeling being one of them.
Data labeling and validation. Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth
provides a user-friendly interface for labelers to annotate data. Annotators
review and correct the automated labels, adding tags, bounding boxes, or
other relevant annotations as needed. You can even implement quality
control measures, such as consensus labeling (multiple annotators label
the same data) and audit sampling (a subset of labels is reviewed by
experts).
Store labeled data. You can keep the labeled data in your S3 bucket, or
you can automatically save it in Amazon SageMaker Feature Store for
easy access during model training and inference. Either way, make sure
you keep the labeled data versioned to track changes.
Model training. Use the labeled data to train your models in Amazon
SageMaker.
With the right mix of automation and human labeling intervention, Amazon
SageMaker Ground Truth provides a robust solution for creating accurate and
reliable labeled datasets, which are crucial for building high-performing ML
models.
Managing Class Imbalance
So far, you have learned how to transform your dataset by first cleaning the
raw data, then performing feature engineering on your data, and finally
labeling the data. This last step is a fundamental aspect of ML because it
focuses on providing the correct predictions to each data point so that your
ML model can quickly learn during training.
With your ML problem framed and your data carefully processed, you would
think you are now ready to select an ML algorithm and start the training
process, right? Not quite yet!
Your dataset may look good syntactically as a result of selecting, extracting,
and creating features, but not semantically due to an uneven distribution of
labels. For examples, in a healthcare use case, consider a dataset where the
majority class represents healthy individuals and the minority class represents
patients with a rare disease. The goal of your ML problem is to predict a
disease accurately. When your dataset presents a disproportionate class of
labels—just like in this scenario with a majority class with healthy individuals
—you are dealing with a class imbalance.
Class imbalance leads to a model that is biased toward the majority class. This
can significantly impact the performance and fairness of the model,
particularly in cases where the minority class is of critical importance, like in
our healthcare use case.
The good news is that AWS offers a comprehensive suite of products and
services to address class imbalance, ensuring that your models are not only
accurate but also ethical and unbiased.
Before delving into how AWS addresses this challenge, let’s review what
approach you can pursue to tackle class imbalance and the resulting biases.
Class-Imbalance Mitigation Techniques
Data augmentation is generally considered a best practice to generate more
minority labeled data, thereby bridging the gap between majority and minority
classes. Techniques like image augmentation (rotations, flips, and color
adjustments) for image data, or text augmentation (synonym replacement,
random insertion) for text data, can create diverse and representative samples.
However, data augmentation may not always be feasible due to cost, compute
resources availability, and time constraints. In such scenarios, consider using
the following options:
Oversampling. This technique involves increasing the number of data
points of the minority class by duplicating existing examples or
generating synthetic ones. The synthetic minority over-sampling
technique (SMOTE) is a popular method that creates synthetic samples
by interpolating between existing minority class examples. This helps
balance the dataset without simply duplicating records.
Undersampling. This technique works by randomly removing data
points from the majority class, thereby making the class distribution more
even with the minority class. Although it can be effective, undersampling
may lead to a loss of valuable information, potentially impacting the
model’s performance.
Class weighting. While computing loss during training, this technique
assigns higher weights to the ML algorithm for misclassifying the
minority class, thereby forcing the model to pay more attention to it.
Data augmentation is different from synthetic data. Data augmentation
artificially creates new data from the existing training data, whereas
synthetic data is generated data that does not use the original dataset.
Amazon SageMaker Clarify
Amazon SageMaker Clarify helps address class imbalance by providing pre-
training bias metrics to detect and mitigate bias in your datasets. Each metric
corresponds to a different notion of fairness.
These metrics are critical to ensure your models are fair and unbiased from the
start. Table 3.1 shows two of the most commonly used metrics: Class
Imbalance (CI) and Difference in Proportions of Labels (DPL).
TABLE 3.1
Examples of pre-training bias metrics.
Bias metric
Interpretation
Class Imbalance (CI)
Normalized range: [−1, +1]
0: no class imbalance
+1: complete imbalance toward majority
class
−1: complete imbalance toward minority
class
Difference in Proportions
of Labels (DPL)
Range for normalized binary and
multicategory facet labels: [−1, +1]
Range for continuous facet labels: [−∞, +∞]
0: equal proportion of positive outcomes
between facets
+1: facet a has a highest proportion of
positive outcomes
−1: facet d has a highest proportion of
positive outcomes
Equal opportunity
difference (EOD)
Object detection bias
Predictive parity difference
(PPD)
Image classification bias
In the context of class imbalance biases with Amazon SageMaker Clarify, a
facet denotes a specific feature in your dataset that you want to analyze for
potential bias.
Facets are used to identify and measure how different subgroups within your
data might be affected by class imbalance. With Amazon SageMaker Clarify,
facet a denotes the feature value that defines a demographic that bias favors,
and facet d denotes the feature value that defines a demographic that bias
disfavors.
For example, if you’re analyzing a dataset of credit card transactions, facets
may include features like is_fraudulent whose value can be 1 (true) or 0
(false). Let’s say this feature has 99.9% values of 0 to indicate that 99.9% of
the transactions in the dataset are not fraudulent. By examining these facet
values (1 or 0), Amazon SageMaker Clarify can help you understand if certain
subgroups of any of these feature values are underrepresented or
overrepresented in your training data, which could lead to biased model
predictions.
Other pre-training bias metrics can be found at
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/clarify-
measure-data-bias.html.
Even though the range of each metric varies, all of them have the common
characteristic that a value 0 (or near 0) denotes no class imbalance.
By computing these pre-training bias metrics, you can determine the next
course of actions for your dataset in preparation for training. In our example,
assuming facet a is 0, we would likely obtain a CI close to 1. As a result, we
would need to undersample.
The BiasConfig class is part of the sagemaker.clarify library. This
library helps you detect and mitigate bias in ML models. The BiasConfig
class is used to configure the bias analysis settings for your dataset.
Data Splitting
After managing class imbalance, your data is finally ready to be split into
training, validation, and test datasets.
Data splitting refers to dividing your dataset into separate subsets for training,
validation, and testing purposes. This is a critical step in ML to ensure that
your model is trained effectively and evaluated accurately. Let’s see what
should be part of each dataset and, most important, what their intended
purpose is:
Training dataset. The training dataset is used to teach the model. It’s
where the model learns patterns and relationships within the data. During
training, the model uses this data to adjust its parameters and iteratively
learns to minimize errors and improve predictions. For example, you may
feed a model numerous labeled examples of emails (spam versus not
spam) to teach it how to classify incoming emails.
Validation dataset. The validation dataset is used to evaluate the
model’s performance by fine-tuning the model’s hyperparameters. One of
the benefits of using a validation dataset is to prevent a model from
overfitting by ensuring the model generalizes well to unseen data.
Test dataset. The test dataset is (and should be) made up of data the
model has never seen before. After training and validation, the model’s
performance is measured on the test dataset to attain an unbiased
evaluation of how well the model generalizes to new data. For example,
you may create a test dataset by using a separate set of emails that the
model hasn’t seen before to test its accuracy in classifying spam versus
not spam.
In summary, the training dataset is used to build the model, the validation
dataset helps tune the model and prevents overfitting, whereas the test dataset
provides an unbiased evaluation of the model’s performance.
Think of training, validation, and test datasets as stages in preparing for an
important exam. The training dataset is like the study materials you use to
learn the subject thoroughly, allowing you to understand and internalize
the information. The validation dataset resembles the practice exams you
take to assess your readiness, identify areas for improvement, and make
necessary adjustments without it influencing your core learning process.
Finally, the test dataset is similar to the actual exam you take at a test
center with a proctor, objectively evaluating your knowledge and
performance based on unseen questions, ensuring you are well prepared
for real-world scenarios. This metaphor highlights the distinct yet
interconnected roles each dataset plays in developing a successful and
reliable ML model.
To effectively split data for ML—according to best practices—consider
allocating approximately 60–80% for training to ensure the model learns and
acquires a comprehensive understanding of the data. Use 10–20% for
validation to fine-tune model parameters without influencing the training
process, ensuring unbiased performance evaluation. The final 10–20% is
reserved for testing, serving as the ultimate gauge of the model’s ability to
generalize to new, unseen data. Proper partitioning is a key aspect of feature
engineering, as it prevents data leakage, avoids overfitting, and provides an
accurate measure of how well your ML model will perform in real-world
scenarios, impacting its overall reliability and effectiveness.
Data leakage occurs when some test data “leaks” into the training dataset.
This is a common pitfall that can severely compromise the integrity of ML
models. When data leakage happens, the model learns information that it
would not have access to in a real-world scenario, leading to artificially
inflated performance metrics and poor generalization to new, unseen data.
Avoiding data leakage is crucial to ensure that the model’s performance is
accurately evaluated and that it can generalize well to real-world
situations. Effective techniques to prevent data leakage include
maintaining a clear separation between training and test datasets, using
cross-validation, and carefully monitoring data preprocessing steps. As a
best practice, always normalize/standardize your data after you have
already split your data into training and test datasets. If data leakage is
detected, it is essential to re-evaluate the model using a properly separated
dataset to obtain a fair assessment of its performance.
AWS offers Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler to help you with dataset
splitting. Let’s see how in more detail.
Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler
In addition to being your one-stop shop for feature engineering, Amazon
SageMaker Data Wrangler can assist you by splitting your dataset into
training, validation, and test datasets with minimal to no code. Moreover,
specifically you can use the split data transformation based on these four
commonly used techniques:
Random split. This technique ensures that each subset (training,
validation, test) has a similar distribution of categories, preventing bias
toward any particular class. This method is particularly useful when you
don’t need to preserve the order of your input data.
Order split. This technique ensures that data is split in a way that order
is preserved, preventing data leakage by ensuring that past or future
information doesn’t overlap across the train, validation, and test datasets.
This is particularly useful for time-series data or any scenario where the
order of data points is critical.
Stratified split. This technique ensures that each subset maintains the
same proportion of categories as the original dataset. This is particularly
useful for classification problems with imbalanced data, as it helps
maintain the distribution of classes across all subsets, leading to more
reliable model evaluation and training.
Split by key. This technique ensures that no combination of values
across the input columns occurs in more than one of the splits. This is
particularly useful for avoiding data leakage in unordered data. It also
enables consistent grouping by keeping related data together, thereby
preserving the integrity of the splits.
After choosing the split data transformation technique, you can specify the
percentages for the training, validation, and test datasets. For example, you
might allocate 70% for training, 20% for validation, and 10% for testing. You
can finally apply the split data transformation, and Amazon SageMaker Data
Wrangler will automatically split your dataset into the specified subsets.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned what you need to do to prepare your raw dataset as
a meaningful set of features, which stores the relevant content of your data, in
a suitable format that can be fed to and ultimately understood by an ML
algorithm to produce accurate and reliable predictions.
The different types of data (categorical, numerical, textual, image, time-series)
were introduced to logically group the different data transformation
techniques.
By engineering your data with feature selection and extraction, you learned
how to pursue a minimalistic approach (dimensionality reduction) to
selectively choose the relevant features that matter to your ML model. All
aspects of data cleaning were covered, with emphasis on outliers detection and
removal, as well as missing-data-imputation methods. Feature engineering
techniques for numerical, categorical, time-series, and unstructured data were
provided, with examples in the Python programming language.
You learned how Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler and Amazon SageMaker
Feature Store are best suited to perform feature engineering and to store,
share, and manage the resulting features, respectively.
Finally, you learned how to develop an effective labeling strategy with
Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth, how to mitigate class imbalance with
Amazon SageMaker Clarify, and how to split your processed dataset into
training, validation, and test datasets by using Amazon SageMaker Data
Wrangler.
In the next chapters, you will learn how to choose a modeling approach, how
to train and refine your model, and how to evaluate its performance.
Exam Essentials
Know the feature engineering techniques that handle outliers. To handle
outliers in feature engineering, it’s essential to apply techniques that mitigate
their impact on your ML model. These methods include removing outliers
altogether (whenever possible) or transforming them using approaches such as
logarithmic transformation, which can reduce the skewness of your data.
Additionally, imputation methods such as replacing outliers with the median
or mean value can be effective in maintaining the integrity of the dataset while
reducing their impact on the resulting ML model.
Know the feature engineering techniques that handle skewness. To
handle skewness, techniques like logarithmic transformation, square root
transformation, and Box-Cox or Yeo-Johnson transformations are excellent
choices. These techniques can help normalize distributions and make them
more suitable for statistical analysis, especially when dealing with skewed
data where the majority of values are clustered toward one side of the
distribution with a long tail on the other.
Know the feature engineering techniques that do not handle skewness. 
Z-score standardization doesn’t directly address skewness. It scales the data to
have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1, but if the original data is
skewed, it remains skewed after transformation.
MinMax scaling doesn’t directly address skewness either. It resizes data
to fit within a specific range, typically from 0 to 1, but doesn’t transform
the data distribution. If your data is skewed, skewness remains even after
scaling.
Know when to perform feature engineering with normalization versus
standardization. Normalization is useful when scale matters, whereas
standardization is preferred when the distribution is key.
Know the feature engineering techniques that are used for
standardization. For standardization—whose purpose is to ensure that each
feature in your dataset contributes equally to the ML model’s performance—
consider using Z-score for normally distributed data.
Know the feature engineering techniques that are used for
normalization. For normalization—whose purpose is to scale each feature
in your dataset to the same range (usually 0 to 1)—consider using the MinMax
scaling technique.
Know the feature engineering techniques that are used for categorical
data. Use label encoding for categorical ordinal data and tree-based ML
models. Use one-hot encoding for small sets of categorical, nominal data and
non-tree-based ML models. Use binary encoding to reduce the dimensionality
caused by one-hot-encoding techniques. Use feature hashing for high-
cardinality categorical data, especially in use cases where compute resources
need to be optimized and the solution must be cost-effective.
Know the feature engineering techniques that are used for image data. 
For image data you can extract features from your raw dataset with Amazon
SageMaker JumpStart. Amazon Rekognition is also a valid option for basic
image analysis and feature extraction, depending on your use case. After
extracting your relevant features from the dataset, you can leverage Amazon
SageMaker Data Wrangler to transform your dataset for normalization and
dimensionality reduction. Finally, you can store your features in Amazon
SageMaker Feature Store.
Know the feature engineering techniques that are used for textual data. 
For textual data, you can extract features from your raw dataset with Amazon
Comprehend or Amazon Textract. For more customized feature extraction,
Amazon SageMaker allows you to use tokenization, stemming, and
lemmatization to perform basic selection of words or to reduce words to their
root form for subsequent semantic analysis.
Know the AWS services that are used for data labeling. For data labeling
—whose purpose is to enrich your dataset with the actual predictions or
meaningful metadata that helps your model to learn faster—consider using
Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth.
Know how to manage class imbalance. To mitigate the risks introduced by
class imbalance, select a feature that is sensitive to bias (facet), and consider
computing the pre-training bias metrics (provided by Amazon SageMaker
Clarify) for that feature, such as Class Imbalance (CI) or Difference in
Proportions of Labels (DPL). Determine the appropriate strategy accordingly.
This can be data oversampling, undersampling, or class weighting.
Know the differences between training, validation, and test datasets. 
The training dataset is where the model learns patterns, relationships, and
features from the data. Essentially, it’s where the model gets its “education.”
After the model has been trained, the validation dataset helps in adjusting
hyperparameters and tuning the model to improve its performance and
generalization to unseen data. It’s like a practice test before the final exam.
The test dataset is used to evaluate the model’s overall performance. It
provides an unbiased assessment of how well the model generalizes to new,
unseen data. Think of it as the final exam that determines the model’s grade.
Review Questions
1. You are preparing a dataset that contains numerical, categorical, and
ordinal features. To train a predictive model and to increase its prediction
accuracy, you need to transform the categorical features into numerical
values. Which feature engineering solution is best suited for this use
case?
A. One-hot encoding
B. Feature scaling
C. Feature extraction
D. Date formatting
2. You want to convert a column in your training data into binary values.
Which technique is best suited for this transformation?
A. One-hot encoding
B. Tokenization
C. Label encoding
D. Feature hashing
3. During data preparation, you discover missing values on some columns
of a dataset containing categorical features. You need to ensure that this
will not misrepresent the data and reduce the model reliability. What
solution is best suited for this use case?
A. Amazon SageMaker Clarify
B. Multiple imputations
C. Drop the feature
D. Recollect the data
4. You are training a model, and during data analysis you observe different
input variables that vary significantly. You want to ensure that your
dataset does not have features with a larger value that greatly influence
the model’s predictive capability. Which transformation is best suited in
this scenario?
A. Normalization
B. Standardization
C. Binning
D. One-hot encoding
5. You are preparing a dataset that has several categorical features, each
with high cardinality. You want to efficiently feature-engineer the dataset
in a cost-effective way. What solution fits best this use case?
A. Label encoding
B. Lag features
C. Binary encoding
D. Feature hashing
6. A model trained to recognize cars is not performing well. You need to re-
engineer the features in the image dataset to ensure better performance.
What solution best fits this scenario?
A. Tokenization using Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler
B. Lag feature using Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler
C. Binning using Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler
D. Amazon SageMaker JumpStart
7. Which advanced technique is commonly used in feature engineering for
textual data to convert words into numerical vectors that capture semantic
meaning?
A. One-hot encoding
B. Tokenization
C. Word embeddings
D. Normalization
8. What is the most common technique used to handle class imbalance in
machine learning datasets?
A. Data encoding
B. Data augmentation
C. Feature scaling
D. Data splitting
9. Which AWS services can be used for data labeling in AWS?
A. Amazon Comprehend
B. Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth
C. Amazon Rekognition
D. Amazon SageMaker Clarify
10. What is the purpose of splitting a dataset into training, validation, and test
datasets in machine learning?
A. To improve the model’s accuracy
B. To ensure the model has diverse data
C. To prevent overfitting and evaluate model performance
D. To simplify data processing
