Chapter 4
Model Selection
THE AWS CERTIFIED MACHINE LEARNING (ML)
ENGINEER ASSOCIATE EXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED
IN THIS CHAPTER MAY INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT
LIMITED TO THE FOLLOWING:
✔ Domain 2: ML Model Development
2.1 Choose a modeling approach
2.2 Train and refine models
In the previous chapter, we explored the important steps of data transformation
and feature engineering, laying the groundwork for effective machine learning
(ML) applications. In this chapter, we move into the exciting phase of
selecting a model based on your ML problem.
With reference to the ML lifecycle (Figure 4.1), in this chapter our focus is on
choosing a suitable ML algorithm (or AI service) tailored to your specific ML
requirements.
FIGURE 4.1 The machine learning lifecycle.
You will learn how to select an ML algorithm that is best suited for your
specific use case and how to implement it effectively to initiate the model
development process. Remember, the model development process is iterative
in nature, involving continuous refinement and evaluation to ensure the best
possible performance and accuracy of your model. By mastering this iterative
approach, you’ll be well-equipped to tackle complex data challenges and drive
impactful results.
This chapter will guide you through the intricate yet fascinating process of
transforming raw data into powerful predictive models that can drive
actionable insights and decisions.
The selection of an appropriate ML algorithm is a pivotal step in the model
development process. This decision hinges on a clear understanding of your
use case, the nature of your data, and the specific problem you aim to solve.
Whether you’re dealing with a classification task, a regression problem, or
clustering needs, choosing the right algorithm involves balancing factors like
interpretability, accuracy, computational efficiency, scalability, and cost. We’ll
delve into various algorithm types, providing guidelines on when to use each
and how to match them to your unique requirements.
Following the ML lifecycle, once the algorithm is selected, the journey of
training begins. Here, we’ll cover the basic steps of feeding data into the
algorithm. In the next chapter, you will learn how to fine-tune
hyperparameters and iteratively refine the model to enhance its performance.
We’ll also discuss techniques to avoid common pitfalls such as overfitting and
underfitting, ensuring that your model generalizes well to new, unseen data.
By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a comprehensive understanding of the
model selection phase, equipped with the knowledge to choose the most
appropriate algorithm or AI service for your ML problem and the confidence
to implement your selections effectively.
Understanding AWS AI Services
AWS AI services are powerful, prebuilt, and pretrained ML models that help
developers and ML engineers seamlessly integrate AI into their applications
without requiring in-depth knowledge of ML. These services cover a wide
range of AI capabilities, including computer vision, natural language
processing (NLP), speech recognition, generative AI, and predictive analytics.
For instance, Amazon Rekognition allows users to analyze images and videos
to identify objects, people, text, scenes, and activities. Meanwhile, Amazon
Comprehend performs NLP tasks such as sentiment analysis and entity
recognition, enabling businesses to gain insights from unstructured text data.
One of the key advantages of AWS AI services is their ease of use and
scalability. They come with fully managed APIs, which developers can call
from their applications to leverage sophisticated ML capabilities with minimal
effort. These services are also designed to handle large-scale data processing,
ensuring that applications can meet high-performance requirements.
Moreover, AWS AI services integrate seamlessly with other AWS offerings,
enabling users to build end-to-end ML workflows from data collection and
processing to model training and deployment. This holistic approach helps
streamline the development process and accelerates the adoption of AI across
various industries.
For the exam, you need to know which AWS AI services address various AI
and ML use cases, such as text analysis, image and video recognition, speech
synthesis and recognition, translation, personalized recommendations,
document processing, and generative AI. This includes understanding services
like Amazon Comprehend for text analysis, Amazon Rekognition for image
and video recognition, Amazon Polly for speech synthesis, Amazon Transcribe
for speech recognition, Amazon Translate for translation, Amazon Personalize
for recommendations, Amazon Textract for document processing, and Amazon
Bedrock for generative AI. Knowing the specific use cases and applications of
each service is key to effectively leveraging AWS AI capabilities in different
scenarios.
Vision
AWS provides powerful tools for visual content analysis through services like
Amazon Rekognition and Amazon Textract. Amazon Rekognition helps
analyze images and videos to identify objects, faces, and text, offering
capabilities that enhance applications such as security and media analysis.
Amazon Textract excels at extracting text and data from scanned documents,
enabling automated document processing. Together, these services empower
businesses to unlock valuable insights from their visual data efficiently and
effectively.
Amazon Rekognition
Amazon Rekognition is a versatile image and video analysis service powered
by deep learning algorithms, designed to identify a wide range of objects,
people, text, scenes, and activities within visual media. One of its standout
features is facial analysis, which includes face detection, comparison, and
recognition. This enables developers to create applications capable of
recognizing individual faces in real time or from stored media. Additionally,
Amazon Rekognition can detect text within images and videos, allowing for
comprehensive analysis and extraction of textual information.
The service is user-friendly, providing an easy-to-use API that allows
developers to add image and video analysis functionalities to their applications
without requiring extensive knowledge of ML. Its scalability ensures that it
can handle large volumes of data efficiently, making it suitable for both small-
scale projects and enterprise-level solutions. By leveraging Amazon
Rekognition, developers can build sophisticated applications that can analyze
visual content to extract valuable insights, automate processes, and improve
user experiences.
Use Cases
Amazon Rekognition is leveraged for various critical applications across
different industries. It helps detect inappropriate content in images and videos,
ensuring safe and compliant media for platforms. This service is also used for
verifying identities online, enhancing security and user validation processes
for digital services. Media companies can use this service to streamline their
analysis by automatically tagging and categorizing content, making it easier to
manage and retrieve specific assets. Moreover, Amazon Rekognition can send
smart alerts to connected homes, recognizing specific faces or objects and
notifying homeowners of unusual activities, thereby enhancing home security
and automation systems. These use cases showcase Amazon Rekognition’s
versatility and its significant role in transforming how visual data is utilized
across various sectors.
Amazon Textract
Amazon Textract is a sophisticated AI service designed to extract text, forms,
tables, and other data from scanned documents. Unlike traditional optical
character recognition (OCR) technologies, Amazon Textract uses ML to
understand the layout and structure of documents, capturing semantic
relationships between different elements. This advanced capability allows this
AI service to accurately interpret complex information, making it particularly
useful for processing large volumes of documents quickly and effectively,
transforming unstructured data into structured formats that can be analyzed
and utilized efficiently.
One of the key features of Amazon Textract is its ability to recognize and
extract data from tables and forms within documents, understanding the
context and relationships between different pieces of data. This goes beyond
merely reading text; Amazon Textract can differentiate between headers, rows,
and columns in a table, ensuring that the extracted data maintains its original
structure and meaning. This semantic understanding is crucial for applications
that require precise data extraction and interpretation, such as financial
reporting, legal documentation, and healthcare records, where the context of
data is as important as the data itself.
Amazon Textract also integrates seamlessly with other AWS services,
enabling users to build comprehensive data processing pipelines. For example,
extracted data can be stored in Amazon S3, analyzed with Amazon Athena, or
fed into Amazon SageMaker for ML applications. This flexibility allows
organizations to leverage Amazon Textract as part of a broader data strategy,
enhancing their ability to gain insights and drive decision-making from their
document data. By automating the extraction and processing of information
and preserving the semantic relationships, Amazon Textract helps reduce
manual effort, minimize errors, and increase operational efficiency.
Use Cases
Amazon Textract is widely used across various industries to streamline
document processing and data extraction. In the financial sector, it helps
automate the extraction of data from invoices, receipts, and tax documents,
enabling faster and more accurate financial reporting. In healthcare, Amazon
Textract is used to digitize patient records, making it easier to retrieve and
analyze medical information. Legal firms can leverage Amazon Textract to
process large volumes of contracts and legal documents, ensuring that critical
information is accurately captured and accessible. Moreover, in the public
sector, Amazon Textract can assist in managing and analyzing government
forms and applications, improving the efficiency of administrative processes.
These use cases highlight Amazon Textract’s adaptability and its significant
impact on automating data extraction and processing across diverse industries.
Speech
AWS AI services offer comprehensive speech capabilities designed to
transform how applications interact with users through voice. These services
provide tools for both generating speech from text and converting spoken
language into text, enabling more natural and accessible user experiences. For
speech use cases, the main two services are Amazon Polly for converting text
to natural-sounding speech and Amazon Transcribe for turning spoken
language into accurate text.
Amazon Polly
Amazon Polly is a text-to-speech service that uses advanced deep learning
technologies to convert written text into natural-sounding speech. It offers a
wide variety of lifelike voices in multiple languages and supports different
accents, providing developers with the flexibility to create engaging, localized
experiences for their users. Whether it’s for interactive voice response (IVR)
systems, news reading applications, or audiobooks, Amazon Polly enhances
user engagement by making applications more accessible and interactive.
Amazon Polly excels at delivering fast, real-time speech synthesis, ensuring
minimal latency for applications that require immediate responses. Amazon
Polly also supports Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML), allowing
developers to control aspects like speech pitch, rate, and pronunciation for a
more tailored auditory experience. With Amazon Polly, you can easily and
efficiently create dynamic and natural-sounding voice interactions.
Use Cases
Amazon Polly is a versatile text-to-speech service with a wide array of use
cases. It’s ideal for creating engaging voice interactions in IVR systems,
ensuring customers receive clear and natural-sounding responses. Polly is also
perfect for generating audiobooks, offering readers an immersive experience
with lifelike narration. Additionally, it enhances accessibility by converting
text-based content into speech for visually impaired users, making information
more accessible. In e-learning platforms, Polly can bring educational content
to life with dynamic narration, improving comprehension and retention.
Overall, Amazon Polly is a powerful tool for any application that benefits
from high-quality, natural-sounding speech.
Amazon Transcribe
Amazon Transcribe is a powerful automatic speech recognition (ASR) service
that converts spoken language into written text. It’s designed to provide high-
accuracy transcriptions for a variety of audio and video formats, making it an
essential tool for generating searchable text from recorded speech. Whether
used for creating subtitles for video content, generating transcripts for
podcasts and interviews, or enabling real-time captioning for live events,
Amazon Transcribe enhances accessibility and searchability. It also supports
multiple languages and dialects, ensuring broad applicability across different
regions and contexts. With features like speaker identification, punctuation
restoration, and custom vocabularies, Amazon Transcribe helps users obtain
accurate and comprehensive transcripts for diverse applications.
Use Cases
Amazon Transcribe caters to a wide range of applications. It’s perfect for
creating accurate subtitles and captions for video content, making media more
accessible and engaging. Podcasters and interviewers can use it to generate
transcripts, enabling easy content archiving and searchability. In live settings,
Transcribe can provide real-time captioning, enhancing accessibility for
audiences with hearing impairments. It’s also valuable for customer service
call centers, where it can transcribe conversations to improve analysis and
compliance. By converting audio to text efficiently, Amazon Transcribe
enhances the usability and accessibility of spoken content across diverse
industries.
Language
AWS language AI services are designed to enhance and simplify a wide range
of NLP tasks, providing tools for understanding, generating, and translating
human language. These services enable developers to build applications that
can interact with users in a more intuitive and natural way, automate text
analysis, and support multilingual communication. Notably, Amazon Translate
offers real-time language translation, and Amazon Comprehend provides
insights through text analysis, including sentiment detection and entity
recognition.
Amazon Translate
Amazon Translate is a neural machine translation service that provides fast,
high-quality, and affordable language translation. It supports dozens of
languages, enabling businesses and developers to translate large volumes of
text efficiently and integrate translation capabilities directly into their
applications. Amazon Translate can handle real-time translation for
applications such as websites and mobile apps, making it easier for global
users to interact with content in their native languages. The service also
supports batch translation, which is useful for translating large documents or
datasets quickly.
Amazon Translate is designed to preserve the context and meaning of the
original text, ensuring that translations are not only semantically accurate but
also natural-sounding. It uses advanced deep learning models trained on a vast
array of multilingual data, allowing it to continuously improve over time.
Amazon Translate is highly scalable and cost-effective, making it accessible
for businesses of all sizes. It also integrates seamlessly with other AWS
services, allowing users to build comprehensive solutions that leverage
translation capabilities alongside other AI and cloud tools.
Use Cases
Amazon Translate serves a broad range of use cases, making it an invaluable
tool for businesses and developers needing multilingual communication. It’s
widely used for translating website content, enabling global users to access
and interact with the information in their native languages. E-commerce
platforms leverage Amazon Translate to provide product descriptions in
multiple languages, enhancing user experiences and expanding market reach.
In customer support, it helps translate chat and email communications,
ensuring seamless service across different regions. Amazon Translate also
plays a crucial role in translating documents, reports, and user manuals,
facilitating global collaboration and information sharing. Additionally, it
supports real-time translation for applications like social media and instant
messaging, fostering instant and effective communication worldwide.
Amazon Comprehend
Amazon Comprehend is an NLP service that uses ML to uncover insights and
relationships within text. It allows businesses to understand the sentiment
behind customer reviews, extract key phrases, identify named entities, and
even detect the language of the input text. Amazon Comprehend can analyze
large volumes of text quickly and accurately, making it an excellent choice for
processing customer feedback, social media posts, and other unstructured data.
The service can also organize documents by identifying key topics and
categorizing content, helping organizations better manage and understand their
data.
Amazon Comprehend is a highly configurable service that allows for the
creation of custom models tailored to specific business needs. These custom
models enable more precise entity recognition and classification based on the
unique terminology and context of different industries. Just like other AWS AI
services, Amazon Comprehend integrates seamlessly with the AWS
ecosystem, enabling users to build comprehensive text analysis pipelines and
automate workflows. Whether it’s enhancing customer service by analyzing
support tickets or improving content recommendation systems, Amazon
Comprehend provides powerful tools for turning text into actionable insights.
For organizations requiring more advanced capabilities, Amazon SageMaker
offers sophisticated topic modeling algorithms out of the box. These
algorithms will be discussed in detail later in the chapter.
Use Cases
Amazon Comprehend can be applied to a wide range of use cases across
different industries. Businesses often use it for sentiment analysis, helping
them understand customer feedback and social media sentiment to improve
products and services. In the healthcare industry, Amazon Comprehend can
analyze medical records to extract valuable insights and identify key entities
such as medications, conditions, and treatments. It’s also used in content
management systems to automatically tag and organize large volumes of
documents, making them easier to search and manage. In customer service,
Amazon Comprehend can analyze support tickets to identify common issues
and improve response times. Moreover, it aids in fraud detection by analyzing
communication patterns and identifying suspicious activities. Overall,
Amazon Comprehend enables organizations to unlock valuable insights from
text data, enhancing decision-making and operational efficiency.
Chatbot
AWS offers powerful chatbot capabilities through services that enable
businesses to create engaging, interactive, and intelligent conversational
interfaces. These chatbots can be used in various applications, from customer
support to interactive applications and internal help desks. AWS provides tools
like Amazon Lex, which uses advanced NLP to understand user input and
manage complex conversations.
Amazon Lex
Amazon Lex is a powerful service designed to build conversational interfaces
into any application using voice and text. Leveraging the same deep learning
technologies that power Amazon Alexa, Amazon Lex provides advanced
natural language understanding capabilities. This allows developers to create
sophisticated, interactive chatbots that can understand and respond to user
inputs with a high degree of accuracy. By integrating with other AWS services
such as AWS Lambda, Amazon Lex enables seamless execution of backend
logic, making it possible to build complex, end-to-end conversational
applications.
Amazon Lex has the ability to handle multiturn conversations, enabling
chatbots to maintain context and manage complex dialogues. This is
particularly useful for customer service applications, where a bot may need to
gather information across several interactions to resolve an issue. Amazon Lex
also supports built-in integrations with Amazon Connect—AWS’s AI-powered
contact center service—allowing businesses to create automated call center
agents that can assist customers 24/7, reducing the load on human agents and
improving response times. Additionally, Amazon Lex can be used to build
chatbots for a variety of platforms, including web applications, mobile apps,
and social media channels, providing consistent and scalable user experiences
across different touchpoints.
From an engineering standpoint, Amazon Lex offers a user-friendly console
and development environment, where developers can define the bot’s
interaction model, including intents, slots, and responses, without needing
extensive experience in ML or NLP. Moreover, Amazon Lex provides built-in
tools for testing and monitoring chatbot performance, helping developers
iterate and improve their bots over time. With its robust capabilities and
seamless integration with other AWS services, Amazon Lex is a
comprehensive solution for building intelligent, conversational interfaces that
enhance user engagement and streamline business processes.
Use Cases
Amazon Lex is mainly used to improve customer service experiences.
Customers leverage Amazon Lex by creating sophisticated chatbots that
handle inquiries, provide information, and resolve issues, minimizing the need
for human agents and reducing response times. In e-commerce, Lex-powered
bots can assist customers with product searches, order tracking, and
personalized recommendations, enhancing the shopping experience.
Healthcare organizations use Amazon Lex to automate appointment
scheduling, provide medical information, and conduct patient prescreening.
Finally, Amazon Lex is employed in internal business operations for creating
virtual assistants that help employees with tasks such as IT support, HR
queries, and workflow automation. Overall, Amazon Lex empowers
businesses to build intelligent, conversational interfaces that enhance user
engagement and streamline administrative processes.
Recommendation
Recommendation capabilities are provided by AWS through its suite of AI
services. These capabilities are aimed at enhancing user experiences by
delivering personalized content.
At the core of these capabilities is Amazon Personalize, which allows
developers to integrate real-time, tailored recommendations into their
applications easily. Amazon Personalize utilizes sophisticated ML algorithms
to analyze user data, such as browsing history, purchase behavior, and
preferences, to generate highly relevant recommendations.
Amazon Personalize
Amazon Personalize operates by leveraging advanced ML algorithms to
analyze user data and generate highly personalized recommendations. The
process begins with gathering item interaction data from users, such as clicks,
views, and purchases, as well as additional contextual information like item
metadata (e.g., genre, price) and user demographics (e.g., age, gender). This
data is then fed into the ML models, which are trained to identify patterns and
relationships between users and items. The models can be continually updated
with real-time interaction data, ensuring that recommendations remain
accurate and relevant as user preferences evolve.
A key, unique feature of Amazon Personalize is its use of generative AI
techniques to enhance the recommendation process. Generative AI models can
simulate new data points based on existing ones, effectively filling gaps in the
dataset and improving the accuracy of predictions. This is particularly useful
when dealing with sparse data or new users and items that have limited
interaction history. By generating synthetic data points, the system can better
understand user preferences and provide more precise recommendations, even
in scenarios where traditional models might struggle. Moreover, Amazon
Personalize allows for customization based on your unique data. You can
choose the best ML algorithms suited to your specific use case and data
characteristics and provide contextual metadata about users and items for
more informed recommendations.
Furthermore, Amazon Personalize employs sophisticated algorithms to handle
various recommendation tasks, such as collaborative filtering, content-based
filtering, and hybrid approaches. Collaborative filtering relies on the collective
behavior of users to identify similar users and recommend items they liked.
Content-based filtering focuses on the attributes of items to suggest similar
products to those a user has shown interest in. Hybrid models combine these
approaches to leverage the strengths of both, providing robust and well-
rounded recommendations. By using these advanced AI and generative
techniques, Amazon Personalize delivers highly personalized and effective
recommendations that enhance user engagement and satisfaction. Its flexibility
and ease of integration ensure that businesses can tailor the service to their
specific needs, delivering optimal results.
Use Cases
Amazon Personalize is widely used across various industries to enhance user
experiences through personalized recommendations. In e-commerce, it
suggests products based on users’ browsing history and purchase behavior,
increasing conversion rates and customer satisfaction. Streaming services and
news platforms leverage it to recommend movies, TV shows, and articles
tailored to individual interests, keeping users engaged. Businesses also use it
for targeted marketing campaigns, personalizing email content to promote
relevant products and offers, thereby improving engagement. Additionally,
customer support teams utilize Amazon Personalize to recommend relevant
support articles, helping users resolve issues more efficiently.
By delivering highly relevant and timely recommendations, Amazon
Personalize empowers businesses to enhance user engagement and drive better
outcomes across various sectors.
Generative AI
Generative AI represents a cutting-edge advancement in artificial intelligence,
enabling systems to generate (here is where “generative” AI comes from) new
content, such as text, images, or even entire multimedia experiences, from
learned data patterns. With Amazon Bedrock, AWS brings generative AI
capabilities to developers, offering a seamless and scalable platform for
building, fine-tuning, and deploying generative AI models. Amazon Bedrock
provides access to a variety of powerful foundation models (FMs) from
leading AI innovators, along with the tools needed to customize and integrate
these models into applications effortlessly. By using Amazon Bedrock,
businesses can leverage the potential of generative AI to innovate and enhance
their digital solutions, driving creativity and efficiency across various
domains.
Amazon Bedrock
Amazon Bedrock is a fully managed service that simplifies the process of
building and scaling generative AI applications using FMs. It provides access
to a wide range of high-performing FMs from leading AI companies like AI21
Labs, Anthropic, Cohere, Meta, Mistral AI, and Stability AI, as well as
Amazon’s own models, including the newly released Nova FMs.
General-purpose FMs are versatile models that can handle a variety of tasks
such as text generation, translation, summarization, and more. These models
are suitable for a broad range of applications across different industries. With a
single API, developers can experiment with different models, customize them
with their own data using techniques like fine-tuning and retrieval augmented
generation (RAG), and deploy them securely within their applications.
Amazon Bedrock’s serverless architecture eliminates the need to manage
infrastructure, allowing developers to focus on innovation and delivering
value to their users. The Converse API, part of Amazon Bedrock, provides a
consistent and simplified interface for developers to interact with these FMs,
making it easy to integrate conversational AI capabilities into applications for
enhanced user experiences and natural interactions.
Not all FMs are supported by the Converse API. For a detailed list of
supported models and features, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/co
nversation-inference-supported-models-features.html.
One of the standout features of Amazon Bedrock is its marketplace, which
offers a broad selection of specialized FMs for various use cases. Specialized
FMs are tailored to specific tasks or domains, providing more accurate and
efficient performance for particular applications. These models can be highly
beneficial for industries such as healthcare, finance, and entertainment, where
specialized knowledge and precision are critical. The marketplace enables
developers to discover, test, and integrate these specialized models seamlessly
into their ML workflows. Whether it’s text generation, image creation, or
complex multimodal tasks, Amazon Bedrock provides the tools and flexibility
needed to build powerful generative AI applications. By leveraging Amazon
Bedrock, businesses can stay at the forefront of AI innovation, ensuring that
their applications are both cutting-edge and secure. The Converse API further
enhances this capability by offering a straightforward way to interact with
these models, making the integration process seamless and efficient.
When selecting a foundational model, it’s essential to consider the specific
capabilities you need for your application. If your task primarily involves text
generation, analysis, or translation, models like Amazon Titan Text G1 –
Premier, Amazon Titan Text G1 – Express, and Amazon Titan Text G1 – Lite
are ideal. These models are integrated with Amazon Bedrock and support a
wide range of text-related tasks, including open-ended question answering,
code generation, summarization, and conversational chat. For creative
applications, models like Amazon Nova Canvas excel in generating detailed
images from text descriptions, making them perfect for art and design tasks.
For multimodal capabilities, models like Amazon Nova Lite and Amazon
Nova Pro can handle both text and image inputs, providing versatile solutions.
For simple use cases and low budgets, Amazon Nova Micro is a text-only
model suitable for scenarios that require low-latency text processing without
the need for multimodal input. Evaluating the capabilities of these models in
the context of your application’s specific needs will help you choose the most
effective foundational model.
Another criterion to consider when selecting a model is its availability in the
region where your generative AI application will operate. This ensures optimal
performance, compliance with local regulations, and reduces latency,
providing a seamless user experience.
FMs are available on a per-region basis. To find out which models are
supported in your region, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/mo
dels-regions.html.
For the exam, be aware that some models may not be available in your region,
but they can still be used with cross-region inference if this feature is
supported on your region. Cross-region inference enables you to seamlessly
manage unplanned traffic bursts by utilizing compute across different AWS
regions. With cross-region inference, you can distribute traffic across multiple
AWS regions, enabling higher throughput and enhanced resilience during
periods of peak demands. To use cross-region inference, you need to create a
cross-region inference profile. To learn more, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/infer
ence-profiles-support.html.
Last, just like for any well-architected application (generative AI applications
are no different in this regard), you need to consider pricing. Amazon Bedrock
pricing is based on two main models:
On-Demand and Batch
Provisioned Throughput
With the On-Demand and Batch mode, you pay for the number of input and
output tokens processed, where a token is a sequence of characters that the
model interprets as a single unit of meaning. For Provisioned Throughput, you
commit to a specific level of throughput for a period of time, which can be
more cost-effective for applications with consistent usage. For more
information, visit https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/pricing.
The following section will provide a simple example of how to
programmatically use generative AI.
Using Nova Canvas to Generate an Image
The Nova FMs were recently announced at AWS re:Invent 2024. In this use
case, we are going to use Nova Canvas—a state-of-the-art image generation
model—to generate an image from a textual prompt. This example will show
you how to implement this use case programmatically.
As a design consideration, my AWS account’s default region is us-east-2
(Ohio). Because Nova Canvas is not natively supported in my default region
(and I don’t want to implement cross-region inference), I am going to create
my Python client in us-east-1 (N. Virginia)—where the model is currently
natively supported. From the AWS Console, we open Amazon Bedrock and
select us-east-1 (N. Virginia) as our working region. We then request access to
the model, as shown in Figure 4.2.
FIGURE 4.2 Requesting access to Nova Canvas.
The following Python program uses the boto3 module to create an Amazon
Bedrock client in us-east-1 and subsequently interact with the Nova Canvas
FM to request the generation of an image. We run this program using the Code
Editor application in Amazon SageMaker Studio in us-east-1.
Amazon SageMaker Studio is a web-based integrated development
environment (IDE) for your end-to-end ML pipelines. It comes out of the
box with most of the ML libraries you need, and it provides a seamless
Visual Studio (VS) Code developer experience.
To get started with Amazon SageMaker Studio, you need to create a domain in
the region where your program will run (in our case, in us-east-1). Once your
domain is available, you can open Amazon SageMaker Studio, as shown in
Figure 4.3. Figure 4.4 illustrates the Studio home page, where you can create a
space. A space is a managed instance that Amazon SageMaker Studio uses to
launch the Code Editor application. In Figure 4.4, I started a space dario-
ai-space that uses an instance type ml.t3.medium with 5 GB of storage.
To develop your ML applications, you need to create and start your space, as
displayed in Figure 4.5. Your space has an Elastic File System (EFS) attached
to it, where your applications’ code and other artifacts are saved. To avoid
incurring in unwanted cost, make sure you stop your space when you are done
coding.
FIGURE 4.3 Amazon SageMaker Studio.
FIGURE 4.4 Amazon SageMaker Studio Space.
FIGURE 4.5 Amazon SageMaker Studio Code Editor.
import base64
import io
import json
import logging
import os
import boto3
from PIL import Image
from botocore.config import Config
from botocore.exceptions import ClientError
    
class ImageError(Exception):
    "Custom exception for errors returned by Amazon Nova 
Canvas"
    def __init__(self, message):
        self.message = message
    
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)
    
def generate_image(model_id, body):
    """
    Generate an image using Amazon Nova Canvas model on 
demand.
    Args:
        model_id (str): The model ID to use.
        body (str) : The request body to use.
    Returns:
        image_bytes (bytes): The image generated by the 
model.
    """
    logger.info(f"Generating image with Amazon Nova Canvas 
model {model_id}")
    
    bedrock = boto3.client(
        service_name='bedrock-runtime',
        config=Config(read_timeout=300)
    )
    
    accept = "application/json"
    content_type = "application/json"
    
    response = bedrock.invoke_model(
        body=body, modelId=model_id, accept=accept, 
contentType=content_type
    )
    response_body = 
json.loads(response.get("body").read())
    
    base64_image = response_body.get("images")[0]
    base64_bytes = base64_image.encode('ascii')
    image_bytes = base64.b64decode(base64_bytes)
    
    finish_reason = response_body.get("error")
    
    if finish_reason is not None:
        raise ImageError(f"Image generation error. Error 
is {finish_reason}")
    
    logger.info(f"Successfully generated image with Amazon 
Nova Canvas model {model_id}")
    
    return image_bytes
    
def main():
    """
    Entrypoint for Amazon Nova Canvas example.
    """
    logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO,
                        format="%(levelname)s: %
(message)s")
    
    model_id = 'amazon.nova-canvas-v1:0'
    prompt = "Generate an image of a white sand beach at 
sunset."
    
    body = json.dumps({
        "taskType": "TEXT_IMAGE",
        "textToImageParams": {
            "text": prompt
        },
        "imageGenerationConfig": {
            "numberOfImages": 1,
            "height": 1024,
            "width": 1024,
            "cfgScale": 8.0,
            "seed": 0
        }
    })
    
    try:
        image_bytes = generate_image(model_id=model_id, 
body=body)
        image = Image.open(io.BytesIO(image_bytes))
        
        # Create directory if it doesn't exist
        efs_directory = '/home/sagemaker-user/ch04/images'
        if not os.path.exists(efs_directory):
            os.makedirs(efs_directory)
        
        # Save the image to the EFS attached file system
        output_image_path = os.path.join(efs_directory, 
"white_sand_beach_sunset.png")
        image.save(output_image_path)
        print(f"Image saved to {output_image_path}")
    
    except ClientError as err:
        message = err.response["Error"]["Message"]
        logger.error(f"A client error occurred: 
{message}")
        print(f"A client error occurred: {message}")
    except ImageError as err:
        logger.error(err.message)
        print(err.message)
    else:
        print(f"Finished generating image with Amazon Nova 
Canvas model {model_id}.")
    
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
I saved this program in the Code Editor as test_nova_canvas.py.
This program utilizes the boto3 module to build a client object named
bedrock that interacts with Amazon Bedrock in us-east-1, where Nova
Canvas is natively supported. As shown in the generate_image method, this
client uses the invoke_model method to send a prompt (encapsulated as a
text property of the body parameter) to create an image of a white sand
beach at sunset.
When run in Amazon SageMaker Studio, this code generates the requested
image, as shown in Figures 4.6 and 4.7.
FIGURE 4.6 Program output.
FIGURE 4.7 An image generated by Nova Canvas.
Once the image is generated, the program decodes the base64 image data and
saves it as white_sand_beach_sunset.png in the /home/sagemaker-
user/ch04/images folder of the EFS mounted on your Amazon SageMaker
Studio instance.
Amazon SageMaker Studio instances come with EFS mounted by default,
so any files saved in local directories within the instance will be stored on
the attached EFS. This ensures that our generated image will be readily
available and persistent across different sessions within Amazon
SageMaker Studio.
The program also includes comprehensive error handling to ensure a smooth
process, logging meaningful messages along the way. This setup ensures that
the image is both generated and stored efficiently, ready for further use or
display.
During the writing of this book, Amazon SageMaker was renamed
Amazon SageMaker AI. For the exam, be aware of this name change.
Whenever the book mentions Amazon SageMaker (the service), it means
Amazon SageMaker AI
(https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/introducing-the-next-
generation-of-amazon-sagemaker-the-center-for-all-your-
data-analytics-and-ai).
Use Cases
Amazon Bedrock is an excellent choice for developers looking to build
generative AI applications with robust foundational models. It’s ideal for tasks
such as text generation, image creation, and multimodal processing, thanks to
its integration with high-performing models like Amazon Titan and Amazon
Nova. If you need scalable, reliable, and easy-to-use AI capabilities with
managed infrastructure, Amazon Bedrock provides a seamless environment
for both experimentation and deployment. Additionally, Amazon Bedrock’s
pay-as-you-go pricing makes it accessible for projects of varying sizes, from
small startups to large enterprises.
Conversely, Amazon Bedrock might not be the best fit if your application
requires highly specialized or domain-specific models that are not available
within the platform or marketplace. If you need models trained on proprietary
data, have strict data residency, or have latency requirements that demand
highly specialized solutions, other platforms or custom-built models might be
more appropriate. Additionally, if cost is a primary concern and your project
has minimal AI needs, simpler, more cost-effective solutions might suffice
without the advanced capabilities of Amazon Bedrock.
Developing Models with Amazon SageMaker
Built-in Algorithms
Although AWS AI services like Amazon Rekognition, Comprehend, and
Personalize offer powerful, prebuilt solutions for common tasks such as image
analysis, text processing, and recommendation systems, they may not provide
the flexibility needed for specialized use cases. These managed services are
designed to be easy to use and require minimal ML expertise, making them
suitable for quick deployments and standard applications. However, when
your project demands custom feature engineering, advanced model
architectures, or optimization for specific performance metrics, Amazon
SageMaker’s built-in algorithms offer the tools and flexibility needed to
achieve these goals.
Choosing to build models with Amazon SageMaker’s built-in algorithms
offers several advantages, particularly when you require greater control and
customization over your ML projects. Amazon SageMaker’s built-in
algorithms are highly optimized for speed, scale, and accuracy, allowing you
to efficiently train, refine, and deploy models tailored to your specific business
needs. This approach is ideal when you need to fine-tune hyperparameters,
incorporate domain-specific knowledge, or handle unique data preprocessing
requirements. By leveraging Amazon SageMaker’s built-in algorithms, you
can achieve a higher degree of precision and performance, especially in
complex or bespoke applications where off-the-shelf solutions may fall short.
Additionally, Amazon SageMaker provides seamless integration with the
broader AWS ecosystem, ensuring a cohesive workflow from data preparation
to model deployment. You can easily import data from Amazon S3, Amazon
EFS, or Amazon FSx for Lustre; utilize AWS Lambda functions for
preprocessing; and deploy models using Amazon SageMaker endpoints or
AWS Lambda for real-time inference. This tight integration simplifies the ML
lifecycle, enhances operational efficiency, and reduces the time and effort
required to manage different components of the ML pipeline. It also allows
you to take advantage of Amazon SageMaker’s distributed training
capabilities, which can significantly accelerate model training on large
datasets.
In this section, we will explore the built-in algorithms offered by Amazon
SageMaker, their appropriate use cases, and how to effectively utilize them to
build robust ML models. Figure 4.8 can help you map built-in algorithms to
specific ML problem types, input formats, and use cases.
FIGURE 4.8 Amazon SageMaker built-in algorithms.
Supervised ML Algorithms
As you learned in Chapter 1, supervised ML is a type of algorithm that learns
from labeled training data to make predictions or decisions. In supervised
learning, each training example includes input data in the form of a set of
features, along with the corresponding output or label. The algorithm uses
these labeled examples to learn the mapping between inputs and outputs, and
it can then apply this learned mapping to new, unseen data to predict
outcomes.
This approach is particularly useful when there is a clear and predefined
relationship between the input features and the corresponding label, also
known as the target variable. Common applications of supervised learning
include tasks such as regression, where the goal is to predict a continuous
value (e.g., predicting house prices based on features like size and location),
and classification, where the goal is to categorize data into discrete classes
(e.g., identifying whether an email is spam or not).
Supervised learning should be used when labeled data is available and the
objective is to make accurate predictions based on this data. Within supervised
learning, there are several pathways depending on the nature of your ML
problem.
For regression problems, algorithms like linear regression, decision trees, and
XGBoost can be employed to predict continuous values.
In binary classification, algorithms such as logistic regression, support vector
machines, and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) help in distinguishing between two
classes.
For multiclass classification, where data needs to be categorized into more
than two classes, approaches like decision trees, random forests, and neural
networks are commonly used.
Additionally, supervised learning encompasses time-series forecasting
algorithms like DeepAR, which predicts future values based on past
observations. Moreover, algorithms like Object2Vec are used for creating
embeddings that capture semantic information from objects or entities,
enhancing the performance of downstream tasks such as recommendation
systems or semantic search.
General Regression and Classification Algorithms
This section introduces the most common regression and classification
supervised ML algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.
Linear Learner
We will start with the Amazon SageMaker Linear Learner algorithm, which
provides a solution for both classification and regression problems.
In linear regression use cases, you feed the algorithm labeled samples 
. 
 is a high-dimensional vector of feature values 
, and  is a
real number denoting the label associated to the sample data point.
For binary classification problems, the label must be either 0 or 1.
For multiclass classification problems, the labels must be from 0 to
num_classes – 1.
The algorithm learns a linear function or, for classification problems, a linear
threshold function and maps a vector  to an approximation of the label .
The Linear Learner algorithm requires a data matrix, with rows representing
the observations (or your data points) and columns representing the
dimensions of the features. It also requires an additional column that contains
the labels that match the data points. At a minimum, Amazon SageMaker’s
Linear Learner requires you to specify input and output data locations and
objective type (classification or regression) as arguments. The feature
dimension is also required. For more information, see
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/APIReference/
API_CreateTrainingJob.html.
Amazon SageMaker’s linear learner algorithm requires input data to be in
CSV file or RecordIO-protobuf format.
You can specify additional parameters in the HyperParameters string map of
the request body. These parameters control the optimization procedure or
specifics of the objective function that you train on such as the number of
epochs, regularization, and loss type.
Let’s deep dive into Linear Regression and Logistic Regression, which are the
most common linear modeling use cases, respectively, for regression and
classification ML problems. Support vector machines (SVMs) are also
included as another selection of a Linear Learner algorithm.
Linear Regression
Linear regression is one of the simplest and most widely used algorithms in
supervised ML. The primary goal of linear regression is to model the
relationship between a dependent variable (also known as the target or output
variable) and one or more independent variables (known as features or
predictors). It does this by fitting a linear equation to the observed data. The
linear equation can be written in the following form:
where  is the actual observed output, 
 is the intercept, 
are the coefficients (or weights) of the features 
, and 
represents the error, also referred to as the residual (the difference between the
actual and predicted values).
Your goal is to predict the coefficients 
 the model will learn to minimize the
error  across the entire dataset.
When evaluating the model, we look at the residuals to understand how well
the model is performing. In linear regression the model aims to find the linear
function that minimizes the mean squared error (MSE). The formula for MSE
is as follows:
where
 denotes the number of observations in your dataset, 
 denotes the
actual value for the observation , and 
 denotes the predicted value for the
observation .
Minimizing the MSE helps ensure that the predictions are as close as possible
to the actual values, effectively reducing the overall error.
You can use the LinearRegression class from the sklearn.
linear_model module to build a linear regression model from a dataset, as
shown in the following snippet:
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression
    
# Generate some sample data
np.random.seed(0)
X = 2 * np.random.rand(100, 1)
y = 4 + 3 * X + np.random.randn(100, 1)
    
# Fit a linear regression model
model = LinearRegression()
model.fit(X, y)
y_pred = model.predict(X)
    
# Plot the data points
plt.scatter(X, y, color='blue', label='Data Points')
    
# Plot the regression line
plt.plot(X, y_pred, color='red', label='Regression Line')
    
# Plot the residuals
for i in range(len(X)):
    plt.plot([X[i], X[i]], [y[i], y_pred[i]], 
color='green', linestyle='--')
    
plt.xlabel('X')
plt.ylabel('y')
plt.title('Linear Regression with Residuals')
plt.legend()
plt.show()
    
# Print Mean Squared Error
mse = np.mean((y - y_pred) ** 2)
print(f"Mean Squared Error: {mse}")
Let’s see how this program works:
Data generation We generate a matrix 
 with 100 rows (samples) and
1 column (feature). Each row denotes the value (observation or sample)
of a single feature, which is a random number uniformly distributed
between 0 and 2. Then we define a linear relationship 
 with some added residual. In the program, 
represents the vector of target variables corresponding to each sample.
Model fitting We create and fit a linear regression model using
LinearRegression from scikit-learn.
Visualization As illustrated in Figure 4.9, we scatter the data points,
and we plot the regression line. We finally draw dashed lines to show the
residuals (the differences between actual and predicted values) for each
data point (100 in total).
FIGURE 4.9 Linear regression.
MSE  We calculate and print the MSE to quantify the model’s
performance.
Logistic Regression
Despite the name, logistic regression is a classification algorithm, which
allows you to model the probability of a correct category prediction using a
linear combination of input features. This algorithm is particularly useful
when the dependent variable is binary, meaning it can take on only two
possible outcomes: correct category prediction or incorrect category
prediction.
Logistic regression works by applying a logistic function to the linear
combination of the input features, which transforms the output to fall within
the range of 0 and 1. This output can then be interpreted as the probability of
the event occurring, with a threshold (commonly 0.5) used to classify the
event into one of the two possible categories.
The logistic function, also known as the sigmoid function, is key to logistic
regression and is defined as follows:
In the formula,  is the linear combination of the input features and their
corresponding coefficients:
As illustrated in Figure 4.10, the logistic function maps any real-valued
number into a probability measure–i.e., the unit interval (0, 1)–making it
suitable for probability estimation. The S-shaped curve of the sigmoid
function ensures that as the input
 becomes very large or very small, the
output approaches 1 or 0, respectively, but never actually reaches these
extreme values. This characteristic is crucial for modeling probabilities, as it
ensures that the predicted probabilities are always within a valid range.
FIGURE 4.10 Logistic function.
The best way to understand how an algorithm works is with a simple example.
The following program in Python uses the Iris dataset to predict whether a
flower is of the species Iris-virginica based on the sepal length and width. The
program uses a logistic regression algorithm and plots the decision boundary,
as well as the probability estimates provided by the sigmoid function.
The Iris dataset is a popular dataset containing measurements of different
features of Iris flowers (sepal length, sepal width, petal length, petal
width) from three species (Iris-setosa, Iris-versicolor, Iris-virginica). This
dataset is available in the load_iris class from the sklearn.datasets
module. For more information, visit https://scikit-
learn.org/1.5/auto_examples/datasets/plot_iris_dataset.
html.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn import datasets
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    
# Load the Iris dataset
iris = datasets.load_iris()
X = iris.data[:, :2]  # Using only sepal length and sepal 
width
y = (iris.target == 2).astype(int)  # Only interested in 
whether it is Iris-Virginica or not
    
# Split the data into training and test sets
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, 
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
    
# Train the Logistic Regression model
model = LogisticRegression()
model.fit(X_train, y_train)
    
# Generate grid of points to plot the sigmoid function
x_min, x_max = X[:, 0].min() - 1, X[:, 0].max() + 1
y_min, y_max = X[:, 1].min() - 1, X[:, 1].max() + 1
xx, yy = np.meshgrid(np.arange(x_min, x_max, 0.01), 
np.arange(y_min, y_max, 0.01))
    
# Calculate the probabilities
Z = model.predict_proba(np.c_[xx.ravel(), yy.ravel()])[:, 
1]
Z = Z.reshape(xx.shape)
    
# Plot the decision boundary and sigmoid probabilities
contour = plt.contourf(xx, yy, Z, alpha=0.8, 
cmap=plt.cm.Greys, levels=np.linspace(0, 1, 11))
    
# Update scatter plot with different markers for each 
class
plt.scatter(X[y == 0, 0], X[y == 0, 1], c='white', 
edgecolors='k', marker='o', s=40, label='Not Iris-
Virginica')
plt.scatter(X[y == 1, 0], X[y == 1, 1], c='white', 
edgecolors='k', marker='s', s=40, label='Iris-Virginica')
    
plt.colorbar(contour, label='Probability of Iris-
Virginica')
plt.xlabel('Sepal length')
plt.ylabel('Sepal width')
plt.title('Logistic Regression Sigmoid Function 
Visualization')
    
# Add legend
plt.legend()
    
plt.show()
Let’s see first how this program works:
Load and preprocess the data The Iris dataset is loaded, and only the
sepal length and sepal width features are selected. The target variable is
converted to a binary format, indicating whether the flower is Iris-
virginica.
Split the data The data is split into training and test sets using
train_test_split. This helps in evaluating the model’s performance
on unseen data.
Train the logistic regression model A logistic regression model is
instantiated. The model is trained on the training data using the fit
method.
Generate a grid of points A grid of points covering the feature space
(sepal length and sepal width) is created using np.meshgrid. This grid
will be used to visualize the decision boundary and probabilities.
Calculate probabilities The trained model is used to predict the
probability of each data point in the grid belonging to the Iris-virginica
class using the predict_proba method. These probabilities are then
reshaped to match the grid.
Plot the results The decision boundary and the probabilities are plotted
using contourf. The data points are plotted on top of this using
scatter. A color bar is added to indicate the probability scale, and a
legend is included to denote what the circle and square data points
represent (Not Iris-Virginica and Iris-Virginica).
This program demonstrates logistic regression’s ability to create a linear
decision boundary and visualize how the model’s probabilities vary across the
feature space. Figure 4.11 displays the plot generated by this program.
FIGURE 4.11 Probability ranges calculated with logistic regression.
In Figure 4.11, square data points indicate true Iris-virginica data samples,
whereas circle data points indicate other Iris species (Iris-setosa or Iris-
versicolor). Notice how probability ranges are separated with each other by
lines. This is because the logistic regression algorithm tries to correlate
features (in this case, sepal length and sepal width) using a linear equation.
During training, a logistic regression algorithm tries to find a linear decision
boundary that separates the two classes. Let’s elaborate a little more.
Mathematically, the logistic regression algorithm fits a linear combination of
the input features to the log-odds of the binary outcome.
In our example, the binary outcome is the event that a data sample is actually
an Iris-virginica, and
 denotes the probability that such event occurs:
The last part of the equation is referred to as the logit function and returns the
log-odds of , which is then passed through the logistic (sigmoid) function to
produce a probability between 0 and 1:
Because the logit  is a linear combination of the features, the decision
boundary created by logistic regression will also be linear. This boundary
represents the points where the model predicts a 50% probability (i.e., 
). Data points on one side of the line will have probabilities greater than 50%,
and data points on the other side will have probabilities less than 50%.
In Figure 4.11, the contour lines you see represent the probability thresholds
generated by the logistic regression model. Each line corresponds to a specific
probability value. Because the underlying equation used to calculate these
probabilities is linear, the contour lines are parallel and evenly spaced. These
lines indicate regions with similar probabilities and help visualize how the
model separates different classes.
Support Vector Machines
SVMs are versatile supervised learning algorithms that can be used for both
classification and regression tasks, offering powerful solutions for a range of
ML problems.
In classification, SVMs work by finding the optimal hyperplane that separates
the classes in the feature space with the maximum margin. This margin is the
distance between the hyperplane and the nearest data points from either class,
known as support vectors. By maximizing this margin, SVMs aim to achieve
better generalization on unseen data. SVMs can handle both linear and
nonlinear classification problems by using kernel tricks to transform the
feature space into higher dimensions, making it possible to draw a linear
boundary in this transformed space. Commonly used kernels include linear,
polynomial, and radial basis function (RBF) kernels, each suited to different
types of data distributions.
For regression tasks, SVMs are adapted into support vector regression (SVR).
The primary goal of SVR is to find a function that deviates from the actual
target values by a value no greater than a specified margin and at the same
time, is as flat as possible. In other words, SVR tries to fit the best possible
line within a margin of tolerance ( ) for the target values. This method uses a
similar concept to support vectors in SVM classification, identifying key data
points that define the optimal regression line or curve while ignoring any
points that fall within the margin. The result is a robust and flexible model that
can handle outliers and noise effectively. Like SVM for classification, SVR
also benefits from kernel functions to capture complex relationships between
features and the target variable, making it a powerful tool for regression
analysis.
Use Cases
Linear regression is best used when there is a clear, linear relationship
between the dependent variable and one or more independent variables. It’s
ideal for simple to moderately complex problems where the goal is to predict a
continuous outcome, such as predicting house prices based on square footage
and number of bedrooms. Linear regression is easy to implement and interpret,
making it suitable for scenarios where model transparency is important.
However, it may not be the best choice for more complex relationships that
involve nonlinearity or interactions between variables. In such cases, using
linear regression can lead to poor model performance and inaccurate
predictions. Additionally, linear regression is sensitive to outliers and
multicollinearity, which can distort the results. Therefore, it’s less appropriate
for datasets with significant outliers, high-dimensional data, or where the
assumption of a linear relationship does not hold. For these more complex
scenarios, other algorithms like polynomial regression, decision trees, or
gradient boosting might be more effective.
Logistic regression is a go-to method for binary classification problems, where
the outcome variable is categorical with two possible outcomes, such as spam
detection, disease diagnosis (positive/negative), or predicting customer churn
(yes/no). It’s suitable when the relationship between the independent variables
and the log-odds of the dependent variable is linear. Logistic regression is easy
to implement and interpret, providing not only classification but also the
probability of class membership. However, it is less effective for complex
datasets with nonlinear relationships or interactions between variables. In such
cases, its performance might lag behind more advanced techniques like
decision trees, SVMs, or neural networks, which can model more intricate
patterns. Additionally, logistic regression assumes the absence of
multicollinearity among independent variables and requires a sufficiently large
dataset to produce reliable results, making it less appropriate for small, highly
correlated, or very high-dimensional data.
Multicollinearity refers to a situation in statistical modeling, specifically in
multiple regression analysis, where two or more predictor variables are
highly correlated. This high correlation means that one predictor variable
can be nearly linearly predicted from the others. This creates redundancy
and can cause issues in estimating the coefficients of the regression model
reliably. One way to address multicollinearity is with regularization
techniques, which add a penalty to the linear regression model for having
learned large coefficients that do not generalize well to unseen data.
Regularization will be covered in Chapter 5.
SVMs are powerful supervised learning models used primarily for
classification tasks, although they can also be applied to regression problems.
They are particularly effective when dealing with high-dimensional datasets
and cases where the classes are well-separated by a clear margin. SVMs are
advantageous when the number of features exceeds the number of samples, as
they are less prone to overfitting in such scenarios.
In ML, overfitting occurs when a model learns the training data too well,
capturing noise and outliers in addition to the underlying patterns. This
results in a model that performs exceptionally well on the training data but
poorly on unseen data, as it fails to generalize to new examples.
Overfitting can be mitigated through techniques such as cross-validation,
pruning in decision trees, using regularization methods, or simplifying the
model to ensure it captures only the relevant patterns without the noise.
We will cover overfitting and the techniques to address it in Chapter 5.
However, SVMs are not ideal for large datasets due to their computational
intensity, which can lead to longer training times and higher memory usage.
Additionally, SVMs may struggle with noisy datasets and overlapping classes,
where they might not perform as well compared to more flexible algorithms
like random forests or gradient boosting. They also require careful tuning of
hyperparameters such as the kernel type and regularization parameters to
achieve optimal performance. In summary, SVMs are best used for small to
medium-sized (up to approximately 10,000 samples), high-dimensional
datasets with clear class separations, and less suited for large, noisy datasets or
problems requiring quick training and predictions.
K-Nearest Neighbors
The k-NN algorithm is a simple yet effective supervised ML method used for
classification and regression problems. The core idea behind k-NN is that
similar data points are likely to be close to each other in the feature space.
When making a prediction, k-NN identifies the
nearest neighbors of a given
data point and uses their labels to determine the label of the new point. For
classification, the algorithm assigns the most common label among the
nearest neighbors, whereas for regression, it averages the labels of the
neighbors.
The value of
 is set before the learning process begins and represents the
number of nearest data points—neighbors—to consider when making a
prediction for a new data point. This is a crucial hyperparameter in the k-NN
algorithm. A small value of  (e.g., 
) makes the model highly sensitive
to noise in the data, as it considers only the closest neighbor. Conversely, a
large value of  (e.g., 
) smooths out predictions by averaging over
more neighbors, which can be beneficial for noisy data but may overlook local
patterns. Choosing the right value of  involves balancing these factors and is
typically done using techniques like cross-validation, which will be discussed
in Chapter 5. Essentially, 
 determines the “neighborhood” around a data
point that influences its prediction.
Despite its simplicity, k-NN can be computationally expensive, especially with
large datasets, because it requires calculating the distance between the query
data point and all other points in the dataset. Various distance metrics, such as
Euclidean, Manhattan, and Minkowski distances, can be used to measure
distances. The choice of distance metric can significantly affect the
performance of the algorithm and should align with the nature of the data and
the problem at hand.
The following example visually demonstrates how k-NN works for a
classification problem by using a simplified, two-dimensional version of the
Iris dataset:
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.neighbors import KNeighborsClassifier
from matplotlib.colors import ListedColormap
    
# Load the Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
X = iris.data[:, :2]  # Use only the first two features 
for visualization
y = iris.target
    
# Split the data into training and testing sets
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, 
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
    
# Create and train the k-NN classifier
k = 3
knn = KNeighborsClassifier(n_neighbors=k)
knn.fit(X_train, y_train)
    
# Plot the decision boundary
x_min, x_max = X[:, 0].min() - 1, X[:, 0].max() + 1
y_min, y_max = X[:, 1].min() - 1, X[:, 1].max() + 1
xx, yy = np.meshgrid(np.arange(x_min, x_max, 0.1), 
np.arange(y_min, y_max, 0.1))
Z = knn.predict(np.c_[xx.ravel(), yy.ravel()])
Z = Z.reshape(xx.shape)
    
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 6))
plt.contourf(xx, yy, Z, alpha=0.3, 
cmap=ListedColormap(('gray', 'lightgray', 'darkgray')))
    
# Colors and markers for the classes
training_markers = ['o', 's', '^']
test_markers = ['o', 's', '^']
colors = ['black', 'black', 'black']
labels = ['Iris-setosa', 'Iris-versicolor', 'Iris-
virginica']
    
# Plot training data points
for i, (color, marker) in enumerate(zip(colors, 
training_markers)):
    mask = y_train == i
    plt.scatter(X_train[mask, 0], X_train[mask, 1], 
c=color, label=f'Training {labels[i]}', marker=marker, 
edgecolor='k')
    
# Plot testing data points
for i, marker in enumerate(test_markers):
    mask = y_test == i
    plt.scatter(X_test[mask, 0], X_test[mask, 1], 
facecolors='none', edgecolors='k', label=f'Test 
{labels[i]}', marker=marker)
    
# Add legend for the classes
plt.xlabel(iris.feature_names[0])
plt.ylabel(iris.feature_names[1])
plt.title(f'k-NN Classification (k={k})')
plt.legend()
plt.show()
Here is an explanation on how this program works:
Data loading In this step, we load the Iris dataset and select the first
two features for easy visualization: i.e., sepal length and sepal width.
Data splitting We split the dataset into training and testing sets.
Model training We create a k-NN classifier with 
 and fit it to
the training data.
Plot the decision boundary The decision boundary in the plot is the
result of the k-NN prediction with 
 and is visually displayed in
Figure 4.12 by the three regions in the two-dimensional feature space of
our Iris dataset. The region on the left side of Figure 4.12 indicates Iris-
setosa predictions, the region at the bottom indicates Iris-versicolor
predictions, and the region on the right side indicates Iris-virginica
predictions.
FIGURE 4.12 Fitting k-NN to 2D Iris dataset.
Plot training and test data points Similarly, the shape of each data
point directly corresponds to its actual class label (i.e., the true value of
the class: Iris-setosa, Iris-versicolor, or Iris-virginica), allowing you to
visually distinguish between predictions and labels for different data
points in the plot. Test data points are plotted with white fill and black
contours using facecolors='none' and edgecolors='k'.
Notice in Figure 4.12 how a few Iris-virginica training data points are
located in the bottom area of the feature space (i.e., the Iris-versicolor
area) to denote how our k-NN algorithm (with 
) mistakenly
classified these Iris-virginica data points as Iris-versicolor. As a result,
this model didn’t perform well. More information will be provided in
Chapter 5 when you will learn how to evaluate a model’s performance by
tuning the value of the model’s hyperparameter, like .
To use the k-NN algorithm in Amazon SageMaker, you first need to prepare
your dataset and upload it to a suitable storage location (e.g., Amazon S3,
Amazon EFS, or Amazon FSx for Lustre). You can then configure an
estimator with the k-NN algorithm by specifying parameters like the number
of neighbors
 and the distance metric. After configuring the estimator with
the necessary hyperparameters and input data paths, you initiate the training
job, which Amazon SageMaker will handle, including provisioning and
scaling the required infrastructure. Once the training is complete, the model
can be deployed as an endpoint on Amazon SageMaker to make real-time
predictions. This integrated approach leverages Amazon SageMaker’s robust
infrastructure to efficiently train and deploy k-NN models.
Use Cases
k-NN is best suited for classification and regression ML problems when the
dataset is relatively small (fewer than 1,000 samples) to moderately sized
(ranging from 1,000 to approximately 10,000 samples) and the decision
boundaries are not overly complex.
It’s particularly effective when the data has a clear, intuitive proximity in the
feature space that makes the concept of “nearness” meaningful. k-NN should
also be considered when the cost of model interpretability is high. This is
because k-NN is inherently considered a very interpretable algorithm,
meaning you can easily understand how it makes predictions based on the
proximity of data points in the feature space, making it a good choice when
explainability is a primary concern.
However, k-NN is less suitable for large datasets due to its high computational
cost and memory usage. It performs poorly with high-dimensional data (the
“curse” of dimensionality) as the distance metric becomes less meaningful,
and it can struggle with noisy data unless carefully tuned. Additionally, k-NN
requires significant preprocessing, such as feature scaling, to work effectively.
If the dataset contains many irrelevant or highly correlated features, k-NN’s
performance may degrade, making it necessary to consider alternative
algorithms like SVMs or random forests in these cases.
Decision Trees (Random Forest and XGBoost)
Decision tree algorithms are among the most popular and widely used
methods in ML for both classification and regression tasks. Their intuitive
nature and ability to handle various types of data make them a go-to choice for
many data scientists and ML engineers.
A decision tree is a tree-like model of decisions and consists of nodes,
branches, and leaves. The root node is the starting point that represents the
entire dataset, internal nodes are points where the data is split based on certain
conditions, and leaves are terminal points that represent the final outcomes or
predictions. Branches are paths representing the outcomes of the decisions.
Decision trees operate by recursively partitioning the dataset into subsets
based on feature values, which result in a tree structure. The goal is to create
branches such that the data within each subset (node) is as homogeneous as
possible. Homogeneity means that each subset of data (or node) resulting from
a split should contain data points that are as similar to each other as possible.
Ultimately, you want to achieve high purity within each node, to indicate that
the data points in each node belong to the same class (in classification tasks)
or have similar values (in regression tasks).
This process involves several key steps:
Feature selection The algorithm selects the best feature to split the data
at each node. The selection is based on metrics like Gini impurity,
information gain (entropy), and variance reduction, depending on the
type of task (classification or regression). The formula to calculate the
variance is as follows:
Data splitting The dataset is split into subsets based on the selected
feature. Each subset then becomes a new node in the tree, and the process
repeats recursively.
Stopping criteria The recursive splitting stops when a predefined
condition is met. This could be a maximum tree depth, a minimum
number of samples per node, or when no further improvement in purity is
possible.
Pruning To prevent overfitting, decision trees can be pruned. Pruning
involves removing branches that have little significance and do not
contribute to the model’s performance. This can be done through
techniques like cost-complexity pruning.
Although decision trees are interpretable and versatile in their ability to
capture complex, nonlinear relationships in the data, they also have the
disadvantage of being highly sensitive to the training dataset. As a result, the
algorithm could generate completely different predictions given a change of
any single data point. To address this limitation, ensemble methods like
random forest and gradient boosting are used. Random forests combine
multiple decision trees, each trained in parallel on different subsets of the data,
to improve accuracy and robustness, whereas Gradient boosting builds trees
sequentially, with each tree correcting the errors of the previous ones.
Random Forest
With random forests, several data points are chosen randomly from the
training dataset to create a new dataset. For each data point, a few features are
selected for building the decision tree for the new dataset. This process is
referred to as bootstrapping. The random forest algorithm involves using a
number of decision trees—hence the name, as a forest is composed of multiple
trees, and each tree is trained on a random subset of the data, contributing to
an aggregated, more accurate, and robust prediction by voting for the most
popular class in classification tasks, or averaging predictions in regression
tasks.
Random forest algorithms have the advantage of training multiple decision
trees in parallel, resulting in significantly faster training times. However,
because each decision tree is generated independently, the model may not
fully optimize for errors made by individual trees, potentially missing out on
the benefits of sequential learning and gradient-based adjustments that more
advanced algorithms like XGBoost provide.
XGBoost
The XGBoost algorithm (extreme gradient boosting), known for its efficiency
and performance, is a powerful, tree-based ML algorithm. The primary
objective of training an XGBoost model is to build an ensemble of decision
trees that sequentially improve the accuracy of predictions by correcting the
errors of previous trees. One key outcome of this training process is the
determination of the most important features in the dataset. Feature
importance is crucial as it helps in understanding which attributes of the data
contribute the most to the predictive power of the model. This understanding
can inform feature selection and model tuning, as well as provide insights into
the underlying patterns in the data.
When comparing XGBoost with random forest, both algorithms are ensemble
methods that utilize decision trees, but they differ significantly in their
approach and performance. As illustrated in Figure 4.13, random forest builds
multiple independent decision trees in parallel and aggregates their
predictions, which helps reduce variance and improve robustness. It is
particularly effective for handling large datasets with high variance but does
not always capture complex patterns in the data as effectively as gradient
boosting methods.
FIGURE 4.13 Random forest versus XGBoost comparison.
On the other hand, XGBoost constructs decision trees sequentially, each tree
aiming to correct the errors of the previous ones. This sequential boosting
process helps XGBoost reduce both bias and variance, leading to more
accurate models, especially on complex datasets. Moreover, XGBoost’s
advanced optimization techniques and regularization make it more efficient
and less prone to overfitting compared to random forest.
The provided Python code demonstrates how to train an XGBoost model on
the Iris dataset. It showcases the steps involved in preparing the data, training
the model, and evaluating feature importance. By plotting feature importance,
the code reveals which features are most influential in making predictions.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import xgboost as xgb
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
    
# Load the Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
X = iris.data
y = iris.target
    
# Split the data into training and testing sets
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, 
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
    
# Create a DMatrix, the internal data structure for 
XGBoost
dtrain = xgb.DMatrix(X_train, label=y_train)
dtest = xgb.DMatrix(X_test, label=y_test)
    
# Define the parameters for the XGBoost model
params = {
    'max_depth': 3,
    'eta': 0.1,
    'objective': 'multi:softprob',  # Multiclass 
classification
    'num_class': 3
}
    
# Train the model
num_round = 50
bst = xgb.train(params, dtrain, num_round)
    
# Prepare new data points for prediction
new_data = np.array([
    [5.1, 3.5, 1.4, 0.2],  # Example data point 1
    [6.2, 3.4, 5.4, 2.3]   # Example data point 2
])
    
# Create a DMatrix for the new data
dnew = xgb.DMatrix(new_data)
    
# Make predictions
preds = bst.predict(dnew)
predictions = [np.argmax(pred) for pred in preds]
    
# Define the class names
class_names = {0: 'Iris-setosa', 1: 'Iris-versicolor', 2: 
'Iris-virginica'}
    
# Print the predictions with class names and detailed 
output, including the actual data points
for i, (data_point, pred) in enumerate(zip(new_data, 
predictions)):
    class_label = class_names[pred]
    print(f'Prediction for datapoint {i+1} ({data_point}): 
{class_label}')
    
# Feature importance plot
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 6))
xgb.plot_importance(bst, ax=ax)
    
# Add custom legend for features
features = ['sepal length (cm)', 'sepal width (cm)', 
'petal length (cm)', 'petal width (cm)']
feature_labels = {f'f{i}': feature for i, feature in 
enumerate(features)}
    
# Create custom legend entries
handles = [plt.Line2D([0], [0], marker='o', color='w', 
label=f'{key}: {value}',
                      markersize=10, 
markerfacecolor='gray') for key, value in 
feature_labels.items()]
ax.legend(handles=handles, title='Feature Legend', 
loc='upper right')
    
plt.show()
In Figure 4.14, the petal length (f2) emerges as a significant feature, indicating
its strong correlation with the target classes in the dataset.
FIGURE 4.14 Feature importance using XGBoost.
After identifying the most important features, the XGBoost model can be used
to make predictions on new, unseen data. Figure 4.15 displays the predictions
for two data points, each made up of four numeric values expressed in “cm”
(centimeters) corresponding to the features f0, f1, f2, and f3.
FIGURE 4.15 XGBoost predictions for two data points.
The code also illustrates how to prepare new data points, run predictions using
the trained model, and interpret the results. This process ensures that the
model is not only robust in terms of its training performance but also effective
in real-world applications where new data is continuously encountered. By
leveraging the insights gained from feature importance and the predictive
capabilities of XGBoost, ML engineers can develop highly accurate and
reliable ML models for various structured data problems.
To use the XGBoost algorithm in Amazon SageMaker, you first need to
prepare your dataset and upload it to a suitable storage location (e.g., Amazon
S3, Amazon EFS, or Amazon FSx for Lustre). You then configure an
XGBoost estimator by specifying essential hyperparameters such as the
objective function (e.g., binary:logistic for binary classification or
reg:squarederror for regression), the number of boosting rounds, and the
learning rate. Other important hyperparameters include max_depth to control
the depth of each tree, subsample to specify the fraction of samples to be
used for training each tree, and colsample_bytree to determine the fraction
of features to be used in constructing each tree. A detailed list of
hyperparameters is available at
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/xgboost_hy
perparameters.html.
After setting up the estimator with these hyperparameters, you initiate the
training job, and Amazon SageMaker manages the infrastructure needed for
the training process. Once the training is complete, the trained XGBoost
model can be deployed as an endpoint in Amazon SageMaker, allowing you to
make real-time predictions on new, unseen data.
Use Cases
Decision trees are a suitable choice when interpretability is a critical aspect of
your ML problem. They are easy to understand and visualize, making them
ideal for scenarios where explaining the model’s decisions to stakeholders is
essential. Decision trees work well with both numerical and categorical data
and do not require extensive data preprocessing. However, they are prone to
overfitting, especially with complex datasets, leading to poor generalization on
new data. Therefore, they are less suitable for tasks involving large, noisy
datasets or those requiring high predictive accuracy.
Random forests should be considered when the goal is to improve predictive
performance while mitigating the overfitting issue associated with individual
decision trees. By averaging the results of multiple trees, random forests
provide more robust and accurate predictions. They are particularly effective
for large datasets with high variance and when feature importance insights are
needed. However, random forests can become computationally intensive with
large numbers of trees and deep models, making them less ideal for
applications requiring real-time predictions or environments with limited
computational resources.
XGBoost is the algorithm of choice when high predictive accuracy and
efficiency are paramount. It excels in handling large datasets and complex
feature interactions due to its sequential tree-building process and advanced
regularization techniques (regularization is a technique to address overfitting
and will be covered in detail in Chapter 5). XGBoost is particularly useful in
competitive ML tasks and scenarios requiring the best possible model
performance. However, it requires careful tuning of hyperparameters and can
be more complex to implement compared to decision trees and random
forests. Additionally, XGBoost’s complexity and computational demands
might be overkill for simpler tasks where interpretability and quick
deployment are more critical than achieving the highest accuracy.
Recommendation
Recommendation systems are pivotal in delivering personalized experiences
across various industries. One effective approach within Amazon SageMaker
is using the factorization machines algorithm, which excels at handling high-
dimensional sparse data common in recommendation tasks. By learning latent
factors representing user-item interactions, factorization machines can predict
user preferences accurately. A key aspect of these models is embeddings,
which are continuous-valued feature representations that capture the semantic
relationships within the data, enabling efficient processing and improved
performance. Amazon SageMaker’s Object2Vec algorithm further enhances
this capability by learning embeddings that can represent diverse types of
objects, facilitating sophisticated recommendation systems that can understand
and predict complex user behaviors and preferences effectively.
Factorization Machines
The Amazon SageMaker Factorization Machines algorithm is a powerful tool
designed to handle high-dimensional sparse datasets, which are common in
recommendation systems and click prediction tasks. This algorithm is
particularly effective at capturing interactions between features that may
otherwise be missed by traditional linear models. Factorization machines
extend the capabilities of matrix factorization, allowing for a broader range of
interactions between variables. By breaking down the complex relationships
within the data into simpler, more manageable components, the algorithm can
efficiently learn from vast amounts of data and provide accurate predictions.
The implementation in Amazon SageMaker supports both classification and
regression tasks, making it versatile for various applications.
One of the key advantages of the Amazon SageMaker Factorization Machines
algorithm is its ability to handle sparsity efficiently. Sparse datasets, where
many features are zero or missing, can pose significant challenges for many
ML algorithms. However, factorization machines leverage latent factors to
model these interactions compactly, reducing the dimensionality of the
problem and improving performance. This makes the algorithm particularly
suited for tasks like user-item recommendations, where the data matrix can be
very large but also very sparse.
To use the Factorization Machines algorithm in Amazon SageMaker, you first
need to prepare your dataset and upload it to a suitable storage location (e.g.,
Amazon S3, Amazon EFS, or Amazon FSx for Lustre). You then configure an
estimator for the factorization machines algorithm by specifying essential
hyperparameters. These include the predictor_type
(binary_classifier or regressor), the number of factors to capture feature
interactions, feature_dim (total number of features), mini_batch_size,
and epochs for training duration. Additionally, you may set regularization
parameters such as bias_lr (learning rate for bias term), linear_lr
(learning rate for linear term), and factor_lr (learning rate for factor term)
to control overfitting. To learn more about factorization machines’
hyperparameters, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/fact-
machines-hyperparameters.html.
Once the estimator is configured with these hyperparameters, initiate the
training job, and Amazon SageMaker will manage the necessary
infrastructure. After training, deploy the trained model as an endpoint in
Amazon SageMaker to make real-time predictions on new data.
Use Cases
The primary use cases for Amazon SageMaker factorization machines include
recommendation systems and predictive modeling in e-commerce. For
instance, they can be used to predict user preferences in online retail by
analyzing past purchase behavior and product interactions. Additionally,
factorization machines are highly effective in click-through rate (CTR)
prediction for online advertising, where understanding user interactions with
ads can significantly impact ad targeting and personalization. Overall, the
versatility and efficiency of the factorization machines algorithm make it a
valuable tool for any scenario involving large-scale, sparse datasets.
Object2Vec
Amazon SageMaker’s Object2Vec is a versatile neural embedding algorithm
designed to generate low-dimensional dense embeddings from high-
dimensional data. These embeddings capture the semantic relationships
between objects, making them useful for tasks like nearest-neighbor search,
clustering, and feature representation in downstream supervised learning tasks.
Object2Vec generalizes the well-known Word2Vec technique, optimized for
various types of structured and unstructured data.
To configure Object2Vec’s hyperparameters in Amazon SageMaker, you need
to specify several key parameters. These include enc0_max_seq_len
(maximum sequence length for the enc0 encoder), enc0_vocab_size
(vocabulary size of enc0 tokens), dropout (dropout probability for network
layers), early_stopping_patience (number of consecutive epochs
without improvement before early stopping), and enc_dim (dimension of the
output embedding layer). Additionally, you can customize the comparator list
(comparator_list) to define how embeddings are compared, and set the
learning rate (learning_rate), mini-batch size (mini_batch_size) and
optimizer type (optimizer). These hyperparameters allow you to fine-tune
the algorithm to your specific use case, ensuring optimal performance and
accuracy. To learn more about Object2Vec’s hyperparameters, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/object2vec
-hyperparameters.html.
Use Cases
Object2Vec in Amazon SageMaker is ideal for scenarios where you need to
generate high-quality embeddings from complex, high-dimensional data to
capture semantic relationships. It’s particularly useful in recommendation
systems, similarity searches, and clustering, and as input features for
downstream supervised learning tasks. However, Object2Vec may not be the
best choice if your primary goal is to perform simple linear transformations or
if your dataset is not sparse and doesn’t benefit from capturing intricate
interactions. Additionally, for applications requiring real-time training or
extremely large-scale datasets with strict latency constraints, other algorithms
optimized for such tasks might be more suitable. Overall, Object2Vec excels
in situations requiring robust, interpretable embeddings for complex,
structured, or unstructured data.
Forecasting
Forecasting with Amazon SageMaker offers robust solutions for predicting
future values based on historical data, enabling businesses to make data-driven
decisions. Amazon SageMaker provides DeepAR as a built-in algorithm for
time-series forecasting. Let’s see how it works.
DeepAR
The DeepAR algorithm in Amazon SageMaker is a powerful tool designed for
time-series forecasting. It leverages recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
capture complex temporal patterns and dependencies within data. Unlike
traditional statistical methods, DeepAR can handle large-scale datasets with
multiple time series, making it particularly effective for forecasting tasks
involving diverse products or locations. By training on related time series, the
algorithm can learn shared patterns and improve the accuracy of individual
forecasts, which is especially beneficial for applications like demand
forecasting, inventory management, and financial predictions.
DeepAR is designed to provide probabilistic forecasts. This means it not only
predicts a single point estimate but also quantifies uncertainty by generating a
range of possible future values. Mathematically speaking, DeepAR outputs a
probability distribution around a predicted future value rather than just a single
point estimate, allowing users to understand the uncertainty associated with
their predictions. DeepAR’s ability to produce probabilistic forecasts is critical
for decision-making processes that need to account for various outcomes and
their associated probabilities. This allows businesses to better manage risks
and optimize resources by understanding the full spectrum of potential future
scenarios.
When configuring DeepAR from Amazon SageMaker, several key
hyperparameters need to be considered. The epochs hyperparameter
determines the number of times the model will iterate over the training data,
influencing the training duration and performance. The context_length
hyperparameter specifies the number of time steps the model uses from the
past to make forecasts. The prediction_length hyperparameter defines the
number of future time steps the model will predict. Additionally, num_layers
and num_cells control the depth and size of the RNN, respectively,
impacting the model’s ability to learn complex patterns. Other important
hyperparameters include mini_batch_size for training efficiency and
learning_rate for adjusting the model weights during training. Proper
tuning of these hyperparameters is essential to optimize the model’s
performance and accuracy for specific forecasting tasks. For a complete list of
DeepAR hyperparameters, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/deepar_hyp
erparameters.html.
Use Cases
Use DeepAR for time-series forecasting when dealing with large-scale
datasets comprising multiple related time series, especially when you need
probabilistic forecasts that quantify uncertainty in predictions. It’s particularly
effective for applications like demand forecasting, inventory management, and
financial predictions, where capturing complex patterns and dependencies is
critical. However, avoid using DeepAR if your dataset is small or consists of
simple, single-variable time series where traditional statistical methods (like
ARIMA or exponential smoothing) may suffice. Also, if real-time training or
very low-latency predictions are required, other algorithms optimized for such
tasks might be more appropriate.
Unsupervised ML Algorithms
If you ever played crosswords, you know the satisfaction of filling in the
blanks and seeing words come together. Now, imagine a more challenging
version called “Diagramless Crosswords,” where you not only have to solve
the clues but also figure out the grid’s structure. This intriguing puzzle is a
perfect metaphor for understanding unsupervised ML. Just like in diagramless
crosswords, where the solver must uncover the hidden grid and the words,
unsupervised ML algorithms work without predefined labels, searching for
patterns and structures directly from the data.
In the domain of unsupervised ML, there are several key algorithms, each
serving different purposes. One popular technique is clustering, with K-means
being a classic example. K-means groups data points into clusters based on
their similarities, much like sorting puzzle pieces into coherent sections.
Another essential method is dimensionality reduction, exemplified by
principal component analysis (PCA). PCA simplifies complex datasets by
reducing the number of dimensions, akin to folding a large map to focus on a
specific area. Topic modeling is another excellent application of unsupervised
ML, with algorithms like latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and neural topic
model (NTM). These algorithms uncover hidden themes within large text
datasets, similar to revealing the underlying story in a jumble of words.
Additionally, anomaly detection is a critical application of unsupervised ML
used to identify outliers or unusual patterns in data. Algorithms like random
cut forest (RCF) and IP insights excel in this domain, spotting anomalies that
might indicate fraud or other irregular activities. Together, these algorithms
showcase the versatility of unsupervised ML, providing powerful tools to
explore and understand your data’s hidden structures without needing
predefined labels or guidance.
Clustering
In unsupervised ML, a dataset is explored to uncover hidden patterns, group
similar data points into clusters, and identify intrinsic structures without
predefined labels, providing valuable insights into the data’s underlying
characteristics and relationships. Clustering, in particular, facilitates the
transition from raw data to valuable information by organizing data into
meaningful groups. This organization transforms isolated data points into
insightful information, which can then be interpreted and analyzed to generate
knowledge. By understanding these clusters, one can derive actionable
knowledge and insights that drive informed decision-making and strategic
planning.
K-Means Clustering
The K-means algorithm is a popular unsupervised ML approach used for
clustering data into a predefined number of clusters, .
The algorithm works iteratively by assigning each data point to one of the 
clusters based on the similarity of data points.
Similarity in this context is typically defined using a measure of distance. The
most common distance metric used is Euclidean distance, which calculates the
straight-line distance between two points in a multidimensional space (our
feature space). The algorithm minimizes the sum of squared distances from
each point to the centroid of the cluster it is assigned to. A centroid is the
central point of a cluster, calculated as the mean of all points within that
cluster. It represents the center of mass for the cluster and is used to assign
data points to clusters.
One common challenge is determining the appropriate number of clusters for a
given dataset. The elbow method is a heuristic used to estimate the number of
clusters by plotting the within-cluster sum of squares (WCSS) against the
number of clusters. As the number of clusters increases, the WCSS decreases,
but there is a point where the rate of decrease sharply slows down, forming an
“elbow” in the plot. This elbow point suggests an optimal number of clusters,
balancing between underfitting and overfitting. Mathematically, the WCSS for
a set of clusters is calculated as the sum of the squared distances between each
data point and its corresponding cluster centroid.
Given a set of clusters 
, with centroids 
,
the WCSS is calculated as follows:
where  is the number of clusters, 
 is the set of data points in the -th
cluster, 
 is a data point in the -th cluster, 
 is the centroid of the -th
cluster, and 
 is the Euclidean distance squared between the data
point 
 and the centroid 
.
Elbow Method Visualization
To help you understand the elbow method, the following Python program
plots the elbow function for the Iris dataset using the KMeans class from the
sklearn.cluster module:
import os
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
    
# Create images directory if it doesn't exist
images_dir = './images'
os.makedirs(images_dir, exist_ok=True)
    
# Load the Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
data = iris.data
    
# Standardize the data
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(data)
    
# List to hold the within-cluster sum of squares (WCSS)
wcss = []
    
# Run K-Means for 1 to 10 clusters
for k in range(1, 11):
    kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=k, random_state=0)
    kmeans.fit(scaled_data)
    wcss.append(kmeans.inertia_)
    
# Plot the WCSS values to visualize the elbow method
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 5))
plt.plot(range(1, 11), wcss, marker='o')
plt.title('Elbow Method for Determining Optimal Number of 
Clusters')
plt.xlabel('Number of Clusters')
plt.ylabel('Within-Cluster Sum of Squares (WCSS)')
plt.grid(True)
    
# Save the plot to the images directory
plot_file = os.path.join(images_dir, 
'elbow_method_plot.png')
plt.savefig(plot_file)
print(f"Elbow method plot has been saved to 
'{plot_file}'")
Most of the statements in this program are straightforward and self-
explanatory, but what happens inside the loop?
Model initialization 
KMeans(n_clusters=k, random_state=0)
initializes the K-means model with k clusters and a specified random
state for reproducibility.
Model training 
kmeans.fit(scaled_data) trains the K-means
model on the scaled_data. During this process, the following steps are
performed:
Cluster centroids initialization: The algorithm initially assigns
random positions to the cluster centroids.
Data point assignment: Each data point is assigned to the nearest
cluster centroid based on the Euclidean distance.
Centroid update: The centroids are recalculated as the mean of all
data points assigned to that cluster.
Reiteration: The process of data point assignment and centroid
update is repeated until convergence (i.e., the centroids no longer
change significantly).
Compute WCSS After the model is trained, kmeans.inertia_ is
appended to the wcss list. kmeans.inertia_ is an attribute of the
KMeans class (in the sklearn.cluster module) that represents the
WCSS. This attribute measures the compactness of the clusters: the lower
the WCSS, the closer the data points within a cluster are to their cluster
centroid.
When run in Amazon SageMaker Studio, this code generates the elbow plot
and saves it as elbow_method_plot.png in the ./images folder of the EFS
mounted on your Amazon SageMaker Studio instance.
Amazon SageMaker Studio instances come with EFS mounted by default,
so any files saved in local directories within the instance will be stored on
the attached EFS. This ensures that your generated plot will be readily
available and persistent across different sessions within Amazon
SageMaker Studio.
The elbow plot is displayed in Figure 4.16, and it effectively illustrates the
optimal number of clusters by highlighting the point where the WCSS begins
to decrease more slowly, forming an “elbow” shape. This visual cue helps in
determining the appropriate number of clusters for the dataset.
FIGURE 4.16 Elbow function.
Based on the data in Figure 4.16, 
 is the optimal number of clusters.
This means adding more clusters beyond 
 does not provide substantial
improvement in the compactness of the clusters. In the case of the Iris dataset,
this optimal clustering effectively captures the natural grouping of the
different species, thus balancing simplicity and accuracy without overfitting.
Let’s now put the K-means algorithm to work and see how effectively our data
points are grouped in three clusters. Keep in mind the Iris dataset is a four-
dimensional feature space with 150 data points. As a result, a plot illustrating
the clustering cannot be visually represented unless the dimensionality is
reduced from four to three (or two). We will learn another unsupervised ML
technique intended to reduce the dimensionality of a dataset in the next
section. To provide a comprehensive view while keeping the visualization
intuitive and accessible, we are going to perform the K-means algorithm with
a simplified, three-dimensional version of the Iris dataset.
A more accurate way to cluster the Iris dataset will be covered in the
upcoming section, when we cover the PCA algorithm, which is designed
to reduce the dimensionality of your feature dataset while maintaining the
maximum possible variance in the data.
The following Python program performs the K-means clustering on three
features of the Iris dataset (sepal length, petal length, petal width) and saves
the plot with the clusters and centroids as kmeans_iris_3d_plot.png in
the ./ch04/images folder of the EFS mounted on your Amazon SageMaker
Studio instance:
import os
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
    
# Define the output directory and file path
output_dir = './ch04/images'
output_file = os.path.join(output_dir, 
'kmeans_iris_3d_plot.png')
    
# Create the output directory if it doesn't exist
os.makedirs(output_dir, exist_ok=True)
    
# Load Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
data = iris.data[:, [0, 2, 3]]
labels = iris.target
feature_names = ['sepal length (cm)', 'petal length (cm)', 
'petal width (cm)']
    
# Standardize the features
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(data)
    
# Perform K-Means clustering
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=3, random_state=42)
kmeans.fit(scaled_data)
clusters = kmeans.labels_
    
# Plot the clustering results in 3D
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
ax = fig.add_subplot(111, projection='3d')
    
# Define colors and markers
colors = ['blue', 'orange', 'purple']
markers = ['o', 's', 'D']
    
# Plot each cluster with different color and marker
for cluster in np.unique(clusters):
    ax.scatter(scaled_data[clusters == cluster, 0],
               scaled_data[clusters == cluster, 1],
               scaled_data[clusters == cluster, 2],
               c=colors[cluster],
               marker=markers[cluster],
               label=f'Cluster {cluster+1}',
               edgecolor='black')
    
# Plot centroids with a star marker
centroids = kmeans.cluster_centers_
for i, centroid in enumerate(centroids):
    ax.scatter(centroid[0], centroid[1], centroid[2],
               s=300,
               c='yellow',
               marker='*',
               edgecolor='black',
               linewidths=2,
               label=f'Centroid {i+1}')
    
ax.set_xlabel('Standardized Sepal Length (cm)')
ax.set_ylabel('Standardized Petal Length (cm)')
ax.set_zlabel('Standardized Petal Width (cm)')
ax.legend()
ax.set_title('K-Means Clustering of Iris Dataset (3D)')
    
# Save the plot to the specified file path
plt.savefig(output_file)
    
# Display a message confirming the plot has been saved
print(f"Plot has been saved as '{output_file}'")
In the provided code, the statement clusters = kmeans.labels_ assigns
the computed labels to the clusters variable, which is then used to color and
group the data points in the plot based on their cluster membership.
The kmeans.labels_ attribute returns an array of integer labels that denote
the cluster each data point belongs to. This happens after fitting the K-means
algorithm on the training dataset with the statement
(kmeans.fit(scaled_data)). In essence, the statement clusters =
kmeans.labels_ assigns a cluster label to each data point in the dataset,
showing which cluster the data point has been grouped into based on the
clustering algorithm’s results.
Do not confuse labels with predictions. Although the statement clusters
= kmeans.labels_ assigns the cluster labels to each data point after
training the K-means algorithm with the statement
kmeans.fit(scaled_data), it is not itself a predictor. Instead, it is an
output of the K-means algorithm that tells you which cluster each data
point belongs to. It doesn’t predict cluster memberships for new, unseen
data points. If you want to predict the cluster for new data points using a
trained K-means model, you need to use the kmeans.predict() method
of the KMeans class. More details will be provided in the next chapter.
To recap, the method kmeans.fit() trains the K-means model on the
training data, whereas the attribute kmeans.labels_ returns the cluster
labels for the training data, and the method kmeans.predict() predicts the
cluster labels for new, unseen data points.
Now that you understand how the code works, you can see the three clusters in
Figure 4.17. The three-dimensional plot of the K-means clustering of the Iris
dataset effectively illustrates the grouping of data points based on three
standardized features: sepal length, petal length, and petal width. The plot uses
distinct shapes to differentiate the three clusters, highlighting their spatial
separation in the feature space. The centroids of each cluster are prominently
displayed with larger yellow star markers, making them easily identifiable.
This visualization provides a clear, intuitive representation of how the K-
means algorithm has segmented the Iris dataset into three distinct groups,
reflecting the natural clustering of the different Iris species.
FIGURE 4.17 3D K-means clustering of Iris dataset.
To use the built-in K-means algorithm in Amazon SageMaker, you can follow
these steps. First, set up an Amazon SageMaker session and specify the K-
means algorithm container. Then, create a K-means estimator, specify the
number of clusters, and fit the model on your data. Last, deploy the trained
estimator to an endpoint to derive inference. The following snippet shows a
brief example:
import sagemaker
from sagemaker import get_execution_role
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
    
# Set up SageMaker session and role
sagemaker_session = sagemaker.Session()
role = get_execution_role()
    
# Specify the K-Means algorithm container
container = sagemaker.image_uris.retrieve(
    'kmeans',
    sagemaker_session.boto_region_name
)
    
# Create KMeans estimator
kmeans = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
    container,
    role,
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m4.xlarge',
    output_path='s3://your-bucket/path-to-output',
    sagemaker_session=sagemaker_session
)
    
# Specify the number of clusters
kmeans.set_hyperparameters(k=3)
    
# Fit the model on your data stored in S3
kmeans.fit({'train': 's3://your-bucket/path-to-train-
data'})
    
# Once trained, the model can be deployed to an endpoint 
for inference
predictor = kmeans.deploy(
    initial_instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m4.xlarge'
)
    
# Use the predictor to make predictions on new data
new_data = [[5.1, 3.5, 1.4, 0.2], [6.2, 3.4, 5.4, 2.3]]
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaled_new_data = scaler.transform(new_data) # Ensure new 
data is standardized
    
# Make predictions
predicted_clusters = predictor.predict(scaled_new_data) 
print(predicted_clusters)
Use Cases
K-means is best suited for scenarios where you have a clear idea of the
number of clusters you expect to find in your dataset. This algorithm is highly
effective for partitioning datasets into distinct, nonoverlapping groups based
on feature similarity. It excels in scenarios with well-separated and spherical
clusters in feature space. Applications such as customer segmentation, market
basket analysis, image compression, and anomaly detection are ideal for K-
means, as the algorithm efficiently handles large datasets and scales well with
an increasing number of samples. When the input data is primarily numerical
and relatively well-structured, K-means can provide insightful and actionable
groupings.
Avoid using K-means if your data does not conform to the assumptions of
spherical and equally sized clusters or if the clusters you aim to detect are of
varying shapes and densities. K-means is sensitive to outliers, so if your data
contains significant anomalies, these can skew the results and lead to poor
clustering. Also, K-means requires a predefined number of clusters (k), which
can be challenging to determine without prior knowledge of the data structure.
If your dataset includes non-numerical features or if you require a more
flexible clustering method that can handle arbitrary cluster shapes and
densities, such as density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
(DBSCAN) or hierarchical clustering, K-means may not be the best choice.
Dimensionality Reduction
Dimensionality reduction algorithms are pivotal in unsupervised ML, helping
to simplify complex datasets by reducing the number of features while
retaining essential information. These techniques transform high-dimensional
data into a lower-dimensional form, making it easier to visualize and analyze
your data. Common algorithms include PCA, which identifies the directions
(principal components) that maximize variance in the data, and t-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE), which focuses on preserving the local
structure and relationships between data points. By reducing dimensionality,
these algorithms help to uncover underlying patterns, facilitate data
compression, and improve the efficiency of subsequent ML tasks.
Amazon SageMaker offers PCA as a built-in algorithm for dimensionality
reduction, enabling ML engineers and data scientists to effectively reduce the
number of features in a dataset while preserving as much variability as
possible, thereby enhancing the efficiency and performance of subsequent ML
models.
Principal Component Analysis
PCA is a powerful dimensionality reduction technique widely used in ML and
data analysis. It works by identifying the principal components, which are the
directions in the data that explain the most variance. By transforming the
original high-dimensional data into a new coordinate system defined by these
principal components, PCA effectively reduces the number of features while
preserving as much of the data’s variability as possible. This makes it easier to
visualize and analyze the data and also enhances the performance of
subsequent ML algorithms by mitigating issues related to multicollinearity and
overfitting.
With reference to the previous example, let’s apply the PCA algorithm to the
Iris dataset to reduce the dimensionality from four to three.
The following Python program uses the PCA algorithm to reduce the
dimensionality of our dataset and then applies K-means clustering to group the
datapoints in three clusters:
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D
import os
    
# Create the output directory if it doesn't exist
output_dir = './ch04/images'
os.makedirs(output_dir, exist_ok=True)
    
# Load the Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
data = iris.data
    
# Scale the data
scaler = StandardScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(data)
    
# Apply PCA to reduce to 3 dimensions
pca_3d = PCA(n_components=3)
pca_data_3d = pca_3d.fit_transform(scaled_data)
    
# Apply K-Means clustering
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=3, random_state=42)
kmeans.fit(pca_data_3d)
cluster_assignments_3d = kmeans.predict(pca_data_3d)
centroids_3d = kmeans.cluster_centers_
    
# Plotting the results in 3D
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
ax = fig.add_subplot(111, projection='3d')
    
# Define colors and markers
colors = ['blue', 'orange', 'purple']
markers = ['o', 's', 'D']
    
# Plot each cluster with different color and marker
for cluster in np.unique(cluster_assignments_3d):
    ax.scatter(pca_data_3d[cluster_assignments_3d == 
cluster, 0],
               pca_data_3d[cluster_assignments_3d == 
cluster, 1],
               pca_data_3d[cluster_assignments_3d == 
cluster, 2],
               c=colors[cluster],
               marker=markers[cluster],
               label=f'Cluster {cluster + 1}',
               edgecolor='black')
    
# Plot centroids with yellow stars and enumerate them
for i, centroid in enumerate(centroids_3d):
    ax.scatter(centroid[0], centroid[1], centroid[2],
               s=300, c='yellow', marker='*',
               edgecolor='black', label=f'Centroid {i + 
1}')
    ax.text(centroid[0], centroid[1], centroid[2], f'C{i + 
1}',
            color='black', fontsize=12, ha='center', 
va='center')
    
ax.set_xlabel('Principal Component 1')
ax.set_ylabel('Principal Component 2')
ax.set_zlabel('Principal Component 3')
ax.legend()
ax.set_title('3D K-Means Clustering of Iris Dataset Using 
PCA')
    
# Save the plot to the specified file path
plt.savefig(os.path.join(output_dir, 
'pca_kmeans_iris_plot_3d.png'))
plt.close()
print(f"3D plot has been saved in '{output_dir}' as 
'pca_kmeans_iris_plot_3d.png'")
I ran this program in Amazon SageMaker Studio; Figure 4.18 displays the
resulting image, illustrating the 3D K-means clustering of the Iris dataset with
PCA-reduced dimensions and highlighted centroids.
FIGURE 4.18 3D K-means clustering of Iris dataset using PCA.
The plot shows three distinct clusters, each represented by a different shape:
Cluster 1: circles
Cluster 2: squares
Cluster 3: diamonds
The axes of the 3D plot represent the three principal components (PC1, PC2,
and PC3) derived from the PCA algorithm. These components capture the
maximum variance in the dataset, effectively reducing its dimensionality while
preserving its essential structure.
The centroids of each cluster are highlighted with stars and are enumerated as
C1, C2, and C3. These centroids represent the central points of each cluster,
providing a reference for the typical features of data points within each group.
The spatial separation of the clusters in the 3D plot demonstrates the
effectiveness of PCA in reducing dimensionality and K-means in identifying
distinct groups within the data. The clear distinction between clusters suggests
that the features of the Iris flowers are well-represented by the chosen
principal components.
Amazon SageMaker provides a highly scalable and efficient implementation
of PCA, which can handle large datasets with ease. To use PCA in Amazon
SageMaker, you start by creating a PCA estimator object, specifying the
number of components you want to retain. You then fit the estimator to your
dataset, which involves calculating the principal components and transforming
the original data into the new lower-dimensional space. Amazon SageMaker’s
PCA algorithm supports both sparse and dense data formats, making it
versatile for various types of data preprocessing tasks.
Once the PCA model is trained, you can deploy it as an endpoint in Amazon
SageMaker to transform new data on the fly, or you can use it in batch
transformations for larger datasets. This enables seamless integration into your
ML workflows, allowing you to preprocess data in real time or at scale.
Additionally, Amazon SageMaker’s integration with other AWS services like
Amazon S3 for data storage and Amazon SageMaker Studio for development
provides a comprehensive environment for developing, testing, and deploying
PCA models. By leveraging Amazon SageMaker’s built-in PCA algorithm,
data scientists and ML engineers can efficiently reduce dimensionality,
improve model performance, and streamline their data processing pipelines.
The following snippet in Python shows an example of how to use PCA with
Amazon SageMaker:
import pandas as pd
import boto3
import sagemaker
from sagemaker import get_execution_role
import os
    
# Initialize the SageMaker session
sagemaker_session = sagemaker.Session()
    
# Get the execution role
role = get_execution_role()
    
# Load the Iris dataset
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
iris = load_iris()
df = pd.DataFrame(iris.data, columns=iris.feature_names)
    
# Save the DataFrame to a CSV file
data_csv = 'iris.csv'
df.to_csv(data_csv, index=False, header=False)
    
# Upload the CSV file to S3
s3_bucket = sagemaker_session.default_bucket()
s3_data_path = f's3://{s3_bucket}/pca/iris.csv'
boto3.Session().resource('s3').Bucket(s3_bucket).Object('p
ca/iris.csv').
upload_file(data_csv)
    
# Get the PCA container image URI
pca_image_uri = sagemaker.image_uris.retrieve(
    'pca',
    boto3.Session().region_name
)
    
# Create the PCA estimator
pca = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
    image_uri=pca_image_uri,
    role=role,
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m4.xlarge',
    output_path=f's3://{s3_bucket}/pca/output'
)
    
# Set PCA hyperparameters
pca.set_hyperparameters(
    feature_dim=4,
    num_components=3,
    subtract_mean=True,
    algorithm_mode='regular'
)
    
# Fit the PCA model
pca.fit({'train': s3_data_path})
    
# Deploy the PCA model
pca_transformer = pca.transformer(
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m4.xlarge',
    strategy='SingleRecord'
)
    
# Perform the transformation
transformed_output = pca_transformer.transform(
    data=s3_data_path,
    content_type='text/csv',
    split_type='Line'
)
    
transformed_output.wait()
    
# Download and view the transformed data
transformed_output_path = transformed_output.output_path
transformed_data = pd.read_csv(transformed_output_path + 
'/train.csv.out', header=None)
print(transformed_data.head())
You will learn more about hyperparameter tuning, model deployment, and
model monitoring in Chapters 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
Use Cases
PCA is highly useful in scenarios where data dimensionality needs to be
reduced to improve analysis and modeling efficiency. It is particularly
effective in dealing with high-dimensional datasets where multicollinearity
(high correlation) among features is a concern. By transforming the data into a
new set of orthogonal components, PCA helps in retaining the most significant
variance while reducing the number of variables. Common use cases include
image compression, where PCA reduces the number of pixels required to
represent an image without significant loss of quality, and exploratory data
analysis, where it helps in visualizing complex datasets by projecting them
into lower-dimensional spaces. Additionally, PCA is used to preprocess data
for ML models, enhancing performance by reducing noise and overfitting
risks.
However, PCA should not be used indiscriminately. One limitation is that it
assumes linear relationships between variables, which might not capture the
complexity in data with nonlinear interactions. It’s also not suitable for
datasets where the variance is not an appropriate measure of importance, as
PCA prioritizes features with higher variance, potentially discarding smaller
yet crucial variances. Additionally, the interpretability of principal
components can be challenging, as they are combinations of original features
that may not have a clear, intuitive meaning. Therefore, although PCA is a
powerful tool for dimensionality reduction, it is essential to consider the
nature of your data and the specific requirements of your analysis before
applying it.
Topic Modeling
Topic modeling is considered an unsupervised ML technique because it does
not require labeled data to identify patterns or topics within a collection of
documents. Unlike supervised learning, where models are trained on input -
output pairs to predict specific outcomes, topic modeling algorithms like LDA
and NTM explore the inherent structure of the data. They aim to discover the
underlying topics that best represent the semantics of the documents, purely
based on word co-occurrence patterns without any prior knowledge or
annotations. This makes topic modeling highly valuable for exploring and
understanding large, unstructured text datasets, enabling users to uncover
hidden themes and insights without the need of prelabeled training data.
To draw an analogy, think of topic modeling as similar to clustering. Just as
clustering algorithms group data points based on their similarity, topic
modeling algorithms group documents based on their underlying topics. By
recognizing patterns and relationships in the text, these algorithms can
categorize documents into distinct topics, making it easier to manage and
understand large volumes of textual data.
Amazon SageMaker offers LDA and NTM out of the box, enabling users to
effortlessly implement and scale their topic modeling solutions without
requiring prior expertise in deep learning.
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
LDA is a generative probabilistic model used for identifying topics within a
large corpus of text. It assumes that each document is a mixture of topics, and
each topic is a mixture of words. The name “Dirichlet” comes from the
Dirichlet distribution, a type of probability distribution that is essential in
LDA. A Dirichlet distribution is used to model the uncertainty about the
probabilities of different topics within a document. It essentially provides a
way to assign probabilities to the various topics in a document, ensuring that
the sum of these probabilities is one. This distribution helps in determining the
proportion of different topics in each document, allowing LDA to uncover the
latent thematic structure of the text. The shape of the Dirichlet distribution is
controlled by a set of parameters (called concentration parameters) that can be
adjusted to influence how the probability mass is distributed across different
topics. By iteratively updating the distributions of topics over documents and
words over topics, LDA can identify meaningful topics that best represent the
semantics of the text.
In AWS, LDA can be utilized efficiently through Amazon SageMaker, which
offers a built-in LDA algorithm for topic modeling. To use LDA in Amazon
SageMaker, you start by preparing your text data and uploading it to an
Amazon S3 bucket (or Amazon EFS or Amazon FSx for Lustre). Next, you
create an LDA estimator by specifying the number of topics and other
hyperparameters. Amazon SageMaker takes care of the training process,
leveraging its scalable infrastructure to handle large datasets and
computationally intensive tasks. Once the model is trained, you can use it to
transform new documents, providing insights into their topic distributions.
This capability is particularly useful for applications such as document
clustering, content recommendation, and information retrieval, where
understanding the thematic structure of text is crucial. By integrating LDA
into your AWS workflow, you can harness the power of topic modeling to
enhance your data analysis and ML solutions.
Use Cases
LDA is highly effective in scenarios where understanding the thematic
structure of a large corpus of text is critical. It excels in applications like
document clustering, content recommendation, and information retrieval. For
example, in a news aggregation service, LDA can help group articles by topics
such as politics, sports, or technology, improving the user experience by
enabling topic-based browsing. Similarly, in academic research, LDA can be
used to analyze a vast number of research papers to discover prevalent topics
and trends over time. By identifying the distribution of topics within each
document, LDA allows businesses and researchers to extract insights from
unstructured text data efficiently.
However, LDA has some limitations due to its assumption of Dirichlet-
distributed topics, which may not capture more complex dependencies
between words and topics. In such cases, NTM can come into play. NTM
leverages neural networks to learn topic representations, allowing for greater
flexibility and the ability to capture intricate patterns in the data. This makes
NTM particularly effective for datasets with strong temporal or sequential
dependencies or where the relationships between words and topics are not
well-modeled by a Dirichlet distribution. By incorporating NTM into your
AWS workflow, you can address some of LDA’s shortcomings and enhance
your ability to analyze and understand complex text data, ensuring more
accurate and meaningful topic representations.
Neural Topic Model
NTM is an advanced approach to topic modeling that utilizes neural networks
to learn more flexible and nuanced representations of topics compared to
traditional methods like LDA. By leveraging the power of deep learning,
NTM can capture complex patterns and dependencies in textual data, making
it highly effective for extracting meaningful topics from large volumes of text.
Unlike LDA, which relies on Dirichlet distributions to model the probability
of topics within documents, NTM uses neural networks to automatically learn
these distributions, providing greater adaptability to various types of text data.
This results in more accurate and interpretable topics, which can be incredibly
valuable for applications such as document clustering, content
recommendation, and sentiment analysis.
NTM can be seamlessly implemented using Amazon SageMaker, which offers
a built-in algorithm for NTM. To utilize NTM in Amazon SageMaker, you
begin by preparing your text data and uploading it to an Amazon S3 bucket (or
Amazon EFS or Amazon FSx for Lustre). Next, you create an NTM estimator
in Amazon SageMaker by specifying the necessary hyperparameters and
training configurations. Amazon SageMaker’s scalable infrastructure handles
the computational demands of training the NTM algorithm, making it suitable
for large datasets. Once the model is trained, it can be used to transform new
documents and generate topic distributions, providing valuable insights into
the thematic structure of your text data. This capability allows businesses to
efficiently analyze and understand their textual data, enabling them to make
data-driven decisions and enhance their ML workflows. By integrating NTM
into your AWS environment, you can leverage the strengths of neural
networks to uncover deeper insights from complex textual data.
Use Cases
NTM is particularly useful in scenarios where traditional topic modeling
methods like LDA fall short. For instance, NTM excels in handling large,
complex datasets where the relationships between words and topics are
intricate and not well-represented by Dirichlet distributions. Its ability to
leverage deep learning allows it to capture more nuanced and flexible topic
representations, making it ideal for applications such as sentiment analysis,
customer feedback analysis, and thematic exploration in extensive text
corpora. Additionally, NTM is well-suited for tasks that require understanding
temporal or sequential dependencies in the text, providing more accurate and
meaningful insights into the underlying thematic structure.
Nonetheless, NTM may not be the best choice for all use cases. When dealing
with smaller datasets or situations where the computational resources are
limited, the complexity and resource demands of the NTM algorithm might
outweigh its benefits. In such cases, simpler models like LDA can be more
efficient, cost-effective, and sufficient. Additionally, if the text data is highly
structured or if the topics are already well-defined, the added flexibility of
NTM might not offer significant advantages over traditional topic modeling
methods. It’s essential to consider the nature of the data and the specific
requirements of the analysis to determine the most appropriate algorithm for
the task at hand.
Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection is an unsupervised ML approach because it identifies
outliers or unusual patterns in data without requiring labeled examples of
anomalies. This is particularly useful when labeled data is scarce or when
anomalies are rare and unpredictable.
Amazon SageMaker offers Random Cut Forest (RCF and IP Insights as built-
in algorithms for anomaly detection.
RCF is a powerful unsupervised anomaly detection algorithm that works by
creating a forest of random decision trees to identify data points that deviate
from the norm.
IP Insights learns usage patterns of IPv4 addresses to detect suspicious
activities, such as unusual login attempts or resource creation from anomalous
IP addresses.
Both algorithms are designed to operate without labeled data, making them
ideal for real-time anomaly detection in various applications.
Random Cut Forest
The RCF algorithm works by constructing a forest of random decision trees.
Each tree in the forest is built using a random sample of the training data, and
anomalies are detected based on the depth at which data points fall within
these trees. Data points that significantly alter the structure of the trees,
resulting in unusually deep placements, are flagged as anomalies. This method
is highly effective for identifying outliers in large datasets, such as detecting
fraudulent transactions or network intrusions.
Like other ML algorithms, to implement RCF in Amazon SageMaker, you
start by preparing your dataset and uploading it to an Amazon S3 bucket (or
Amazon EFS or Amazon FSx for Lustre). Next, you create an RCF estimator
in Amazon SageMaker by specifying hyperparameters such as the number of
trees and the number of samples per tree. Amazon SageMaker handles the
training process, leveraging its scalable infrastructure to efficiently build the
RCF. Once the model is trained, you can deploy it to an Amazon SageMaker
endpoint for real-time anomaly detection, allowing you to monitor and
respond to anomalies as they occur.
Use Cases
RCF is particularly useful for detecting anomalies in large, high-dimensional
datasets where traditional methods might struggle. It excels in applications
like fraud detection, network security, and predictive maintenance. For
example, in financial services, RCF can identify unusual transaction patterns
that may indicate fraudulent activity. In network security, it can detect
anomalies in traffic that suggest potential intrusions. Similarly, in industrial
settings, RCF can monitor sensor data from machinery to detect early signs of
failure (e.g., MTBF, mean time between failure), helping to prevent costly
breakdowns and downtime. Its ability to handle large volumes of data and
uncover subtle, unexpected patterns makes it a powerful tool for real-time
anomaly detection.
RCF is less effective when anomalies are already well-defined and labeled, as
supervised learning algorithms can provide more precise results in such cases.
Additionally, RCF might not perform well with very small datasets where the
random sampling approach could miss important patterns. When the dataset is
small or when labeled anomaly examples are available, other methods like
supervised classification algorithms or simpler statistical techniques may be
more appropriate. It’s essential to consider the nature of the data and the
specific requirements of the application to determine if RCF is the right fit.
IP Insights
The IP Insights algorithm is an unsupervised learning method that learns usage
patterns of IPv4 addresses by associating them with entities such as user IDs
or account numbers. It captures associations between IP addresses and entities,
determining how likely it is that an entity would use a particular IP address.
IP Insights uses neural networks to learn latent vector representations for both
entities and IP addresses, and it can generate embeddings that can be used in
downstream ML tasks. When queried with an (entity, IPv4 address) pair, IP
Insights returns a score indicating how anomalous the pattern is, making it
useful for detecting suspicious activities like unusual login attempts or
resource creation from anomalous IP addresses.
To implement IP Insights in Amazon SageMaker, you start by preparing your
data in the form of (entity, IPv4 address) pairs and uploading it to an Amazon
S3 bucket (or Amazon EFS or Amazon FSx for Lustre). Next, you create an IP
Insights estimator in Amazon SageMaker, specifying hyperparameters such as
the number of entity vectors and the size of embedding vectors. Amazon
SageMaker handles the training process, and once the model is trained, you
can deploy it to an Amazon SageMaker endpoint for real-time predictions or
batch processing. This allows you to monitor and respond to anomalies as they
occur, enhancing your security measures and operational efficiency.
Use Cases
IP Insights is best suited to detect anomalous behavior in scenarios where
tracking the usage patterns of IP addresses is critical. It excels in applications
like detecting fraudulent login attempts, unusual access patterns, and
identifying compromised accounts. For instance, e-commerce platforms and
online services can use IP Insights to monitor and flag suspicious login
activities that deviate from normal user behavior enhancing security and
preventing unauthorized access. Moreover, it can be utilized to safeguard
resources by identifying and mitigating unusual patterns of resource creation
or usage from anomalous IP addresses, helping to maintain the integrity and
security of systems.
However, IP Insights may not be suitable for all scenarios. It is less effective
in environments where IP addresses frequently change or where entities do not
have consistent IP usage patterns, as the model relies on learning stable
associations between entities and IP addresses. In such cases, traditional rule-
based systems or other anomaly detection methods might be more appropriate.
Furthermore, IP Insights might not perform well in contexts where labeled
data is available and supervised learning approaches could provide more
precise anomaly detection.
Textual Analysis Algorithms
Textual analysis refers to the process of using algorithms and ML techniques
to understand, interpret, and derive meaningful information from text data.
This can involve various tasks such as text classification, sentiment analysis,
entity recognition, topic modeling, and summarization. The goal of textual
analysis is to transform unstructured text into structured insights that can be
used for decision-making, improving user experiences, and ultimately deriving
inferences.
You already learned at the beginning of the chapter how Amazon Comprehend
addresses textual analysis as a managed AI service. You also learned
previously how the LDA and NTM algorithms, which are unsupervised ML
techniques, play a significant role in textual analysis, specifically topic
modeling. These algorithms automatically identify patterns and group related
words into topics within large text datasets without needing labeled data.
In this section, we will focus on more advanced textual analysis techniques
provided by Amazon SageMaker’s built-in BlazingText and Sequence-to-
Sequence algorithms.
BlazingText
BlazingText is an efficient and scalable algorithm provided by Amazon
SageMaker for NLP tasks, specifically optimized for text classification and
generating word embeddings using the Word2Vec model. BlazingText is
designed to process large volumes of text data quickly, making it suitable for
real-time applications and large datasets. This algorithm is particularly
beneficial for tasks such as semantic similarity, sentiment analysis, and
document classification, where understanding the relationships between words
is crucial.
An embedding in the context of NLP and ML is a dense vector
representation of data, typically words, that captures their meanings,
syntactic properties, and relationships with other words. These
embeddings are learned from data and are used to convert categorical data
into continuous numerical data, which can then be processed by ML
models. For example, in word embeddings, each word in a vocabulary is
mapped to a high-dimensional vector space. Words with similar meanings
or usages are placed close to each other in this space, allowing models to
understand semantic similarity and relationships between words. Put
differently, embeddings translate semantic similarity as perceived by
humans to proximity in a vector space. Common embedding techniques
include Word2Vec, GloVe, and FastText, which have significantly
improved the performance of various NLP tasks such as text classification,
sentiment analysis, and machine translation.
BlazingText operates by utilizing two main techniques: Word2Vec and text
classification. The Word2Vec model creates dense vector representations of
words, also known as word embeddings, by analyzing large text corpora and
capturing the semantic and syntactic relationships between words. These word
embeddings are then used to understand word similarities and analogies. For
text classification, BlazingText employs efficient implementations of deep
learning models that can categorize text into predefined classes based on the
learned word embeddings. The algorithm leverages multithreading and
hardware acceleration to speed up the training process, ensuring rapid and
scalable performance.
To use BlazingText in Amazon SageMaker, you start by preparing your text
data and uploading it to an Amazon S3 bucket (or Amazon EFS or Amazon
FSx for Lustre). Next, you create an estimator, specifying BlazingText as the
algorithm, and configure the necessary hyperparameters for your training job.
Once the estimator is set up, you launch the training job by pointing it to the
location of your data in Amazon S3. After training is complete, you can
deploy the model to an endpoint for real-time predictions or use it for batch
inference. The following code in Python can be used as a reference:
import sagemaker
    
# Initialize the SageMaker session
sagemaker_session = sagemaker.Session()
role = '<your-iam-role>'
    
# Get the BlazingText container image
container = sagemaker.image_uris.retrieve(
    'blazingtext', sagemaker_session.boto_region_name
)
    
# Create the BlazingText estimator
bt_estimator = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
    container,
    role,
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.c4.2xlarge',
    output_path='s3://<your-bucket>/output',
    sagemaker_session=sagemaker_session
)
    
# Set hyperparameters
bt_estimator.set_hyperparameters(
    mode='supervised',
    epochs=10,
    min_count=2,
    learning_rate=0.05
)
    
# Launch the training job
bt_estimator.fit({'train': 's3://<your-bucket>/train'})
    
# Deploy the model
predictor = bt_estimator.deploy(
    initial_instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m4.xlarge'
)
Notice how you can specify the mode of operation of the estimator in the
statement bt_estimator.set_hyperparameters().
This method takes a dictionary object as the only parameter, whose keys are
defined in the Amazon SageMaker’s documentation.
The hyperparameters for the BlazingText algorithm depend on which mode
you use: Word2Vec (unsupervised) or Text Classification (supervised). For
more information about this method, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/blazingtex
t_hyperparameters.html.
Use Cases
BlazingText is ideal for scenarios that require efficient and scalable text
classification or the creation of word embeddings. It’s particularly useful for
applications involving large volumes of text data, such as processing customer
reviews, social media analysis, and document categorization. The Word2Vec
model within BlazingText is excellent for tasks like semantic similarity, word
clustering, and building feature representations for downstream NLP tasks.
Additionally, its speed and scalability make it suitable for real-time
applications and large datasets, where quick processing and high performance
are essential.
However, BlazingText may not be the best choice for more complex natural
language understanding tasks that require context beyond word embeddings,
such as deep contextual analysis or nuanced language generation. For tasks
that involve understanding the context of sentences or paragraphs, like
question answering or advanced conversational AI, FMs such as
cohere.embed-english-v3 and cohere.embed-multilingual-v3 might be more
appropriate due to their ability to capture contextual information more
effectively. These FMs produce embeddings and are available in Amazon
Bedrock. BlazingText is also less suitable for tasks that require extensive
customization beyond text classification and word embeddings, where more
specialized models or custom-built algorithms may offer better results.
Sequence-to-Sequence
The Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) algorithm in Amazon SageMaker is a
supervised learning algorithm designed for tasks where the input is a sequence
of tokens (such as text or audio) and the output is another sequence of tokens.
This makes it suitable for applications like machine translation (translating
text from one language to another), text summarization (creating a concise
summary of a longer text), and speech-to-text (converting spoken language
into written text). Seq2Seq leverages advanced neural network architectures,
including RNNs and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with attention
mechanisms, to effectively model and generate sequences.
Use Cases
The Seq2Seq algorithm is highly effective for tasks where the input and output
are sequences, making it an excellent choice for applications like machine
translation, text summarization, and question answering. For instance, in
machine translation, Seq2Seq can translate text from one language to another
by understanding the context of the input sequence and generating a
corresponding sequence in the target language. Similarly, in text
summarization, Seq2Seq models can distill long documents into concise
summaries by identifying and retaining the most relevant information.
Additionally, Seq2Seq is useful in chatbot development for generating
coherent and contextually appropriate responses, making it a versatile tool for
a wide range of NLP tasks that require sequence transformation or generation.
Nevertheless, Seq2Seq may not be the best fit for tasks that do not primarily
involve sequence generation or transformation. For instance, if the goal is to
perform simple text classification, such as identifying the sentiment of a tweet
(positive or negative), other models like traditional classifiers or even CNNs
might be more efficient and less resource-intensive. Similarly, tasks that
require the analysis of static features, such as image classification and time-
series prediction without the need for sequence output, are better suited for
other specialized algorithms. In such cases, Seq2Seq’s capabilities may be
overkill and may not provide any additional benefits over simpler models
designed for those specific tasks.
Image Processing Algorithms
Amazon SageMaker offers a suite of built-in algorithms designed to
streamline various image processing tasks, leveraging advanced ML
techniques to deliver high accuracy and efficiency. These include algorithms
like Image Classification, which categorizes images into predefined classes;
Object Detection, which identifies and locates objects within images;
Semantic Segmentation, which classifies each pixel in an image to distinguish
different objects; and Image Embeddings, which transforms images into fixed-
size vectors for use in various downstream tasks. Each of these algorithms
provides powerful tools for automating and enhancing image processing
workflows, making them essential for developing sophisticated computer
vision applications.
Image Classification
Image classification is a fundamental task in computer vision, where the goal
is to assign a label or category to an input image. This process involves
analyzing the content of the image and categorizing it into one of several
predefined classes. For instance, in a dataset of animal photos, an image
classification model can label each image as “cat,” “dog,” “bird,” etc. Image
classification is widely used in various applications such as medical imaging,
autonomous driving, security surveillance, and many others, where accurate
identification of objects within images is key.
Image classification is a supervised ML algorithm that leverages deep learning
techniques, particularly CNNs, to process and analyze images. CNNs are
designed to automatically and adaptively learn spatial hierarchies of features
from images. The process involves several layers of convolutional operations,
pooling, and fully connected layers, which work together to extract features
and make predictions. During training, the model learns to recognize patterns
and features within images by minimizing the classification error over a large
dataset of labeled images. Once trained, the model can accurately predict the
class of new, unseen images based on the features it has learned.
The Image Classification built-in algorithm comes in three “flavors”: the
first is implemented using the popular TensorFlow ML platform, the
second using the PyTorch ML framework, and the third using the MXNet
deep learning library.
To use Image Classification in Amazon SageMaker, you start by preparing
your labeled dataset and uploading it to an Amazon S3 bucket (or Amazon
EFS or Amazon FSx for Lustre). Next, you create an image classification
model using an Amazon SageMaker estimator, specifying the algorithm and
the necessary hyperparameters and pointing to your dataset. The estimator
handles the training process, utilizing Amazon SageMaker’s powerful
infrastructure to efficiently train your model. Once training is complete, you
can deploy the model as an endpoint for real-time predictions or batch
processing. Amazon SageMaker also offers tools for model evaluation and
monitoring to ensure your image classification model performs optimally.
These tools will be discussed in the next chapter.
Use Cases
Image classification algorithms are ideal when you need to categorize images
into specific classes based on their content. These algorithms are particularly
useful in scenarios where accurate identification and labeling of images are
required. For example, in medical imaging, they can be used to classify X-rays
or MRI scans to detect diseases. In the retail industry, image classification can
help in organizing products by identifying items in images. Moreover, these
algorithms are valuable in security and surveillance systems to recognize
faces, license plates, or other objects of interest. Overall, they are beneficial in
any application where the goal is to automatically and accurately categorize
visual data.
Image classification algorithms may not be suitable for tasks that require
understanding the context or relationships between multiple objects within an
image. For instance, if the goal is to detect and locate various objects in an
image (object detection) or segment different regions (semantic segmentation),
more specialized algorithms would be needed. Also, tasks that involve
analyzing images to extract detailed, structured information, such as OCR,
may require different approaches. Furthermore, in cases where the images lack
clear distinctions between categories or where the primary objective is not
classification but other forms of analysis, image classification algorithms
might not be the most effective choice.
Object Detection
With object detection, the goal is not only to identify objects within an image
but also to pinpoint their precise locations using bounding boxes. This dual
capability of classification and localization is integral to applications such as
autonomous driving, security systems, intelligence, surveillance,
reconnaissance, the retail sector, and many others. As a supervised learning
algorithm, object detection requires labeled datasets for training, where each
image includes detailed annotations indicating the objects and their locations.
The Object Detection algorithm in Amazon SageMaker employs sophisticated
deep learning techniques, with popular architectures such as Single Shot
MultiBox Detector (SSD), Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks (R-
CNN), and You Only Look Once (YOLO). The SSD approach integrates a
CNN pretrained for image classification tasks as its base network. Popular
CNN architectures such as VGG-16 and ResNet-50 are often used as the
backbone. The algorithm divides the input image into a grid and, for each grid
cell, predicts multiple bounding boxes and the class probabilities for the
objects within those boxes. During training, the model is fed a dataset of
images along with their corresponding bounding box annotations and class
labels. It learns to minimize the error between its predictions and the ground
truth data, effectively refining its ability to detect and classify objects
accurately. Amazon SageMaker’s implementation of SSD also includes data
augmentation techniques, like flipping, rescaling, and jittering, to enhance the
model’s robustness and avoid overfitting.
Just like other built-in algorithms, to utilize object detection in Amazon
SageMaker, you begin by preparing and labeling your dataset, ensuring that
each image contains annotations for the objects of interest. This labeled
dataset is then uploaded to an Amazon S3 bucket (or Amazon EFS or Amazon
FSx for Lustre). You can create an object detection model using an Amazon
SageMaker estimator, specifying the algorithm (MXNet or TensorFlow) and
the necessary hyperparameters and pointing to your dataset. The estimator
manages the training process, leveraging Amazon SageMaker managed
infrastructure to optimize the model based on your data. After training is
complete, you can deploy the model as an endpoint for real-time predictions or
batch processing.
Use Cases
Object detection is highly effective in scenarios where both the identification
and precise localization of objects within images are critical. This makes it
ideal for applications such as autonomous driving, where vehicles need to
detect and track pedestrians, other cars, and obstacles to navigate safely. It is
also valuable in security and surveillance systems, which rely on identifying
potential threats or suspicious activities by recognizing and tracking objects
like faces, vehicles, and bags in real time. In the retail sector, object detection
can help manage inventory by automatically recognizing and counting
products on shelves, as well as analyzing customer behavior by tracking their
movements within the store. Additionally, it is used in medical imaging to
locate and identify abnormalities or diseases in scans, aiding in diagnosis and
treatment planning. In military applications, especially in intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), object detection is crucial for
identifying and tracking enemy vehicles, personnel, and equipment from aerial
and ground surveillance images, enhancing situational awareness and
decision-making on the battlefield.
Object detection may not be your best choice for tasks that require
understanding the context or relationships between objects without needing
precise localization. For instance, if the goal is simply to classify the overall
content of an image, such as determining whether an image contains a cat or a
dog, image classification algorithms are more appropriate. Similarly, for tasks
that involve segmenting images into regions based on object boundaries, such
as distinguishing between different tissue types in a medical scan, semantic
segmentation algorithms would be more effective. Additionally, if the primary
objective is to analyze static features or patterns in nonvisual data, such as text
or time-series data, other specialized algorithms should be used. Object
detection’s strength lies in its ability to not only recognize objects but also
provide their exact locations, which may be unnecessary for simpler
classification or segmentation tasks.
Semantic Segmentation
Semantic segmentation is a powerful computer vision technique that involves
labeling each pixel in an image with a class label from a predefined set of
classes. Unlike object detection, which identifies objects and their bounding
boxes, and image classification that analyzes only whole images, classifying
them into one of multiple output categories, semantic segmentation provides a
detailed understanding of the image by labeling every pixel according to its
category. This makes it invaluable for applications that require precise
localization and differentiation of objects within an image.
Semantic segmentation algorithms typically use deep learning models,
particularly CNNs with specialized architectures like fully convolutional
networks (FCNs), pyramid scene parsing (PSP), and DeepLabV3. These
models start with a pretrained classification network, which is modified to
output segmentation maps instead of class probabilities. The network
processes the input image through multiple convolutional layers to extract
features at various levels of abstraction. During training, the model learns to
map these features to pixel-level labels using a loss function that measures the
difference between predicted and true labels. Techniques like upsampling and
skip connections are often employed to improve the spatial resolution of the
output, ensuring that the segmentation map accurately represents the fine
details and boundaries of objects within the image.
To use semantic segmentation in Amazon SageMaker, you first need to
prepare and label your dataset, ensuring that each image has a corresponding
segmentation mask that labels each pixel. This labeled dataset is then
uploaded to an Amazon S3 bucket (or Amazon EFS, or Amazon FSx for
Lustre). You can create a semantic segmentation model using an Amazon
SageMaker estimator, specifying the algorithm (such as U-Net or DeepLab)
and the necessary hyperparameters and pointing to your dataset. The estimator
handles the training process, leveraging Amazon SageMaker’s robust
infrastructure to optimize the model based on your data. Once training is
complete, you can deploy the model as an endpoint for real-time predictions or
batch processing.
Use Cases
Semantic segmentation is best utilized in scenarios where a detailed
understanding of the image is required, down to the pixel level. This makes it
ideal for applications in medical imaging, such as segmenting different types
of tissues, organs, or tumors in MRI or CT scans, which is crucial for accurate
diagnosis and treatment planning. In autonomous driving, semantic
segmentation is used to understand the environment by identifying and
differentiating between various objects like roads, sidewalks, vehicles, and
pedestrians. This detailed segmentation helps in safe navigation and decision-
making. Additionally, in agricultural monitoring, semantic segmentation can
be used to differentiate between crops and weeds, assess plant health, and
monitor growth stages, aiding in efficient farming practices. This technique is
also valuable in satellite imagery, where detailed maps are created to identify
different land cover types, such as forests, urban areas, and water bodies for
environmental monitoring and urban planning.
Semantic segmentation is not recommended for tasks that do not require pixel-
level precision or where the primary objective is to simply classify an entire
image or detect objects with bounding boxes. For example, if the goal is to
categorize images into broad classes, such as identifying whether an image
contains a cat or a dog, image classification algorithms are more appropriate.
Similarly, for applications that need to locate and classify objects within an
image, such as detecting faces or vehicles, object detection algorithms are
better suited, as they provide bounding boxes around detected objects but do
not require detailed pixel-level annotations. Additionally, semantic
segmentation may be less effective in cases where the computational cost and
complexity are prohibitive, or where there is limited labeled data available for
training, as it requires a significant number of annotated images to achieve
high accuracy.
Criteria for Model Selection
Choosing the right model for your ML problem involves considering several
critical factors. This section outlines key criteria that will guide you in
selecting the best model for your specific use case and includes examples of
algorithms that fit each criterion.
Accuracy The primary goal of any ML model is to achieve high
accuracy for the given task. Algorithms like XGBoost and SVMs are
known for their high accuracy in various applications, including
classification and regression.
Interpretability Interpretability is equally as important as accuracy,
especially in domains where understanding the decision-making process
is essential. Linear learner and logistic regression models are highly
interpretable, providing clear insights into how predictions are made.
Decision trees are also interpretable, as they visually map the decision
process. These models balance accuracy with interpretability, ensuring
that their decisions can be easily understood and trusted by stakeholders.
Scalability The ability of a model to handle increasing data volumes
and complexity is critical for large-scale applications. Algorithms like
Linear Learner and K-means clustering scale efficiently and can manage
large datasets. Random Cut Forest is also scalable, making it suitable for
anomaly detection in big data scenarios.
Latency and speed For real-time applications, the speed at which a
model can provide predictions is crucial. Algorithms such as random
forest offer quick inference times, making them ideal for scenarios where
timely decisions are critical, like fraud detection and recommendation
systems.
Resource requirements The computational resources required for
training and inference can impact the feasibility of using certain models.
Linear learners, k-NN, and PCA generally require fewer resources
compared to deep neural networks. Assessing the resource requirements
ensures that the models align with your available infrastructure and
budget.
Data availability and quality The availability and quality of data
significantly influence model performance. Algorithms like LDA and
BlazingText perform well with large textual datasets, and K-Means can
work effectively with smaller datasets for clustering tasks. Ensuring high-
quality data for training is critical for developing accurate and reliable
models.
Regulatory and ethical considerations In many industries, models
must comply with regulatory requirements and ethical standards. Logistic
regression and decision trees are often favored in regulated industries due
to their transparency and ease of explanation. Ethical considerations are
particularly important in fields like healthcare and finance, where the
implications of model predictions can have significant consequences.
Cost The cost of implementing and maintaining different models can
vary widely. Models like linear learner and random forest are generally
cost-effective, whereas deep learning models like CNNs may incur higher
costs due to their computational demands. Considering the cost
implications, including cloud resources and data labeling, is essential for
long-term projects.
There is often a trade-off among these factors—for example, accuracy and
interpretability, where complex models that achieve high accuracy may be
difficult to understand, whereas simpler models with better interpretability
may have lower accuracy. Your job as an AWS ML engineer is to balance
these trade-offs to meet the specific needs and constraints of your ML
problem, ensuring that the chosen model aligns with the business objectives
and operational requirements. This involves continuously evaluating and
adjusting the model based on new data and feedback to achieve the best
possible performance while maintaining transparency and trust.
By considering these criteria and understanding which algorithms align with
them, you’ll be well-equipped to select the most appropriate model for your
ML problem. This comprehensive approach ensures that your models are not
only high-performing but also interpretable, scalable, and aligned with your
specific requirements.
Summary
In this chapter, we explored various AWS AI services and Amazon
SageMaker’s built-in algorithms that can be leveraged for different ML use
cases.
AWS AI services offer a range of prebuilt and pretrained ML models designed
to simplify and accelerate the deployment of AI in your applications. These
services include Amazon Rekognition for image and video analysis, Amazon
Comprehend for NLP, Amazon Polly for text-to-speech conversion, Amazon
Lex for building conversational interfaces, Amazon Textract for extracting text
and data from documents, Amazon Transcribe for converting speech to text,
Amazon Translate for real-time translation, and Amazon Personalize for
creating personalized user experiences. Amazon Bedrock, with the new Nova
FMs, also provides robust capabilities for generative AI tasks, enhancing the
flexibility and power of your AI applications. These AI services are fully
managed, requiring minimal ML expertise, and are ideal for developers
looking to integrate AI capabilities quickly into their applications.
For higher flexibility and more specialized ML tasks, Amazon SageMaker
offers a wide range of built-in algorithms and support for popular frameworks
like TensorFlow, PyTorch, and MXNet, empowering you to tailor your ML
models to meet specific requirements and optimized performance.
We explored Amazon SageMaker’s supervised ML algorithms, which are
designed for tasks that use labeled data for training. Examples included Linear
Learner for regression and classification, XGBoost for gradient boosting on
decision trees, k-NN for classification and regression, and Factorization
Machines for recommendation systems and large-scale classification tasks.
These models learn from the input-output pairs in the training data to make
predictions on new, unseen data.
We then learned built-in Amazon SageMaker’s unsupervised ML algorithms,
which are designed to uncover hidden patterns and structures within unlabeled
data. These algorithms include K-Means for clustering similar data points into
distinct groups, PCA for dimensionality reduction, LDA and NTM for topic
modeling, and RCF and IP Insights for anomaly detection.
Later in the chapter, more advanced algorithms leveraging deep neural
networks for textual analysis and image processing were introduced. These
included built-in Amazon SageMaker algorithms like BlazingText for efficient
word embeddings and text classification, Seq2Seq for sequence-to-sequence
tasks such as machine translation and text summarization, Image
Classification for categorizing images into predefined classes, Object
Detection for identifying and locating multiple objects within an image, and
Semantic Segmentation for pixel-level classification of image content. These
deep learning models are designed to handle complex tasks with high
accuracy, enabling robust AI solutions across various domains such as NLP,
computer vision, and autonomous systems.
The chapter concluded with a curated list of criteria you need to consider in
the selection of your model, including accuracy, interpretability, scalability,
latency, resource requirements, data availability, regulatory, and cost.
Exam Essentials
Know the AWS AI services for vision.  AWS offers two AI services
tailored for vision-related tasks. Amazon Rekognition enables image and
video analysis, allowing users to detect objects, faces, landmarks and text, as
well as recognize celebrities and analyze sentiments. For document
processing, Amazon Textract extracts text, tables, and other data from scanned
documents, making it easier to digitize and manage document workflows
efficiently.
Know the AWS AI services for speech and chatbots.  AWS provides two
AI services for speech-related tasks. Amazon Polly delivers text-to-speech
capabilities, transforming written content into natural-sounding speech in
multiple languages. Amazon Transcribe offers automatic speech recognition
(ASR), converting audio recordings into accurate text transcriptions. Amazon
Lex enables the creation of conversational interfaces, combining ASR and
natural language understanding (NLU) to power chatbots and voice assistants.
Know the AWS AI services for language.  AWS offers two AI services for
language processing tasks. Amazon Comprehend enables natural language
processing (NLP) by extracting insights from text, such as sentiment analysis,
entity recognition, and key phrase extraction. Amazon Translate provides real-
time and batch translation services, allowing for seamless multilingual
communication.
Know the AWS AI services for generative AI.  AWS offers Amazon
Bedrock, with a large selection of foundation models (FMs) including the
newly released Nova FMs. Amazon Bedrock provides a robust platform for
creating and deploying generative AI applications, allowing developers to
build sophisticated solutions like text generation, image synthesis,
embeddings, and more. These services empower users to leverage state-of-the-
art generative AI models with ease, enabling innovative and creative
applications across various domains.
Know the difference between classification and regression algorithms.  
Classification algorithms are used to categorize data into distinct classes or
labels, such as determining whether an email is spam. Regression algorithms,
on the other hand, predict continuous numerical values, such as forecasting
stock prices or estimating house values based on various features.
Know the linear learner algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.  
Amazon SageMaker provides linear learner algorithms for both classification
and regression tasks. These include Linear Regression, Logistic Regression,
and Support Vector Machines. These algorithms are highly interpretable,
making them ideal for applications where understanding the contribution of
each feature to the predictions is critical.
Know the k-NN algorithm and when to use it.  The k-nearest neighbors
algorithm is a simple yet powerful supervised ML algorithm for classification
and regression tasks, where predictions are made based on the closest data
points in the feature space. It is an Amazon SageMaker built-in algorithm,
particularly useful when the decision boundary is complex and nonlinear, and
when interpretability is important, as the reasoning behind each prediction is
clear by examining the nearest neighbors. k-NN is best used with smaller
datasets, due to its computational complexity, and in cases where you have a
clear understanding of the data’s structure and relationships.
Know the decision tree supervised algorithms provided by Amazon
SageMaker and when to use them.  Amazon SageMaker provides
powerful decision-tree-based supervised algorithms like Random Forest and
XGBoost. Random Forest is valuable for its ability to reduce overfitting and
improve accuracy by creating an ensemble of decision trees and averaging
their predictions, making it suitable for tasks that involve a large number of
input features. XGBoost is known for its computational efficiency and
performance, particularly with large datasets and complex models, and is often
used for classification and regression tasks that require high predictive
accuracy and speed.
Know the clustering algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.  
Amazon SageMaker provides the unsupervised K-Means algorithm for
clustering, which is not be confused with the supervised k-NN algorithm
intended for classification and regression tasks.
Know the dimensionality reduction algorithms provided by Amazon
SageMaker.  Amazon SageMaker provides the unsupervised Principal
Component Analysis algorithm for dimensionality reduction, which is useful
for reducing the number of features in a dataset while retaining as much
variability as possible.
Know the topic modeling algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.  
Amazon SageMaker provides the unsupervised Latent Dirichlet Allocation
and Neural Topic Model algorithms for topic modeling use cases, enabling
users to discover hidden topics in large collections of textual data without the
need for labeled data.
Know the anomaly detection algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.
 Amazon SageMaker provides the unsupervised Random Cut Forest and IP
Insights algorithms for anomaly detection use cases, which are particularly
useful for identifying unusual patterns or behaviors in data, such as detecting
fraudulent activities or network intrusions.
Know the textual analysis algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.  
Amazon SageMaker provides the BlazingText and Sequence-to-Sequence
algorithms for textual analysis use cases, enabling efficient handling of large-
scale textual data and supporting various natural language processing tasks
such as text classification, translation, and summarization.
Know the image processing algorithms provided by Amazon SageMaker.
 Amazon SageMaker provides the Image Classification, Object Detection,
and Semantic Segmentation algorithms for image processing use cases,
enabling developers to build, train, and deploy machine learning models that
can analyze and understand visual data, such as recognizing objects,
classifying images into categories, and segmenting images at the pixel level
for detailed analysis.
Review Questions
1. Which AWS AI service would you use to analyze large volumes of
unstructured text and extract insights such as entity recognition and
sentiment analysis?
A. Amazon Textract
B. Amazon Lex
C. Amazon Comprehend
D. Amazon Polly
2. Which AWS AI service is specifically designed for generative AI
applications, providing a robust platform for creating text, images, and
other creative outputs?
A. Amazon Rekognition
B. Amazon Bedrock
C. Amazon Translate
D. Amazon Transcribe
3. For detecting objects and people in real-time video feeds, which AWS AI
service would be most appropriate?
A. Amazon Textract
B. Amazon Lex
C. Amazon Rekognition
D. Amazon Comprehend
4. Which AWS service provides a highly efficient and scalable solution for
dimensionality reduction in large datasets?
A. Amazon Translate
B. Amazon Polly
C. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on Amazon SageMaker
D. K-Means on Amazon SageMaker
5. Which Amazon SageMaker algorithm is particularly useful for
classification and regression tasks due to its efficiency and high
performance?
A. Random Forest
B. XGBoost
C. k-Nearest Neighbors
D. Principal Component Analysis
6. Which supervised ML algorithm provided by Amazon SageMaker is
ideal for reducing overfitting by averaging multiple decision trees?
A. Linear Learner
B. BlazingText
C. Random Forest
D. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
7. For which type of tasks is Amazon SageMaker’s Linear Learner
algorithm particularly well-suited?
A. Text classification
B. Clustering
C. Classification and regression
D. Anomaly detection
8. Which algorithm would you use in Amazon SageMaker if you need
highly interpretable results in a linear relationship model?
A. Random Cut Forest
B. Linear Learner
C. Neural Topic Model
D. DeepAR
9. Which Amazon SageMaker supervised ML algorithm is specifically
designed for time series forecasting?
A. IP Insights
B. DeepAR
C. Neural Topic Model
D. Sequence-to-Sequence
10. Which supervised ML algorithm in Amazon SageMaker is known for
boosting weak learners to create a strong predictive model?
A. K-Means
B. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
C. XGBoost
D. Random Cut Forest
11. For your ML problem you need an unsupervised, highly interpretable
algorithm in Amazon SageMaker to reduce data dimensionality while
preserving maximum variance. Which built-in algorithm would you use?
A. K-Means
B. Random Cut Forest
C. Principal Component Analysis
D. Neural Topic Model
12. For detecting rare events and anomalies with high accuracy in data
streams, which unsupervised Amazon SageMaker algorithm would you
choose?
A. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
B. IP Insights
C. Random Cut Forest
D. Factorization Machines
13. When you need to discover hidden topics in large text datasets with high
interpretability and accuracy, which Amazon SageMaker algorithm
would you select?
A. K-Means
B. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
C. Principal Component Analysis
D. Random Cut Forest
14. For accurately clustering large datasets into predefined groups based on
feature similarity, which highly interpretable Amazon SageMaker
algorithm would you use?
A. Random Cut Forest
B. Principal Component Analysis
C. K-Means
D. Neural Topic Model
15. Which Amazon SageMaker algorithm is known for its high accuracy and
performance in large-scale text classification tasks, while also being cost-
effective?
A. BlazingText
B. Sequence-to-Sequence
C. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
D. IP Insights
16. Identify the Amazon SageMaker algorithm that offers high performance
and accuracy for text translation tasks, while also being cost-effective and
interpretable.
A. Random Cut Forest
B. Sequence-to-Sequence
C. BlazingText
D. Principal Component Analysis
17. For high-accuracy identification and localization of multiple objects
within an image, which Amazon SageMaker algorithm excels in
performance and cost-efficiency?
A. Image Classification
B. Object Detection
C. Semantic Segmentation
D. Factorization Machines
18. Which Amazon SageMaker algorithm provides high accuracy and cost-
effectiveness for classifying images into predefined categories, ensuring
interpretability and performance?
A. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
B. Image Classification
C. Object Detection
D. IP Insights
19. Identify the Amazon SageMaker algorithm that allows for detailed pixel-
level analysis of images, offering high accuracy and interpretability while
being performance-efficient.
A. Random Cut Forest
B. Image Classification
C. Semantic Segmentation
D. BlazingText
20. Which Amazon SageMaker algorithm utilizes word embeddings for
natural language processing tasks, balancing accuracy, cost-effectiveness,
interpretability, and performance?
A. Random Cut Forest
B. Principal Component Analysis
C. Latent Dirichlet Allocation
D. BlazingText
