Chapter 8
Model Security
THE AWS CERTIFIED MACHINE LEARNING (ML)
ENGINEER ASSOCIATE EXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED
IN THIS CHAPTER MAY INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT
LIMITED TO, THE FOLLOWING:
✔ Domain 4: ML Solution Monitoring, Maintenance, and
Security
4.3 Secure AWS resources
Security Design Principles
In the last chapter of this guide, a key aspect of your ML solution will be
examined, i.e., security. As you have learned since Chapter 1, security is a
pillar of the AWS Well-Architected Framework, and it should be taken into
consideration in any phase of the ML lifecycle. This way of thinking security
is referred to as security by design, which can be generalized to any phase of
the software development lifecycle, not just machine learning.
AWS offers a broad spectrum of services that you can use to design and build
a robust security-by-design architecture for your ML workloads.
In this section, we will introduce the security design principles that can help
you decide which AWS services suit best the components of your ML
solution. Any solution you design, architect, and build in AWS should tie back
to one (or a collection) of these principles.
Implement a Strong Identity Foundation
AWS offers several services to help you implement a strong security identity
foundation for your ML workloads. These services are all centered around
AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM), which allows you to securely
control access to AWS services and resources. You can create and manage
users and groups and use permissions to allow or deny their access to AWS
resources.
It all starts by implementing the least privilege principle and enforcing
separation of duties with appropriate authorization for each interaction with
AWS resources.
The least privilege principle dictates that any identity (users, applications, and
systems) should be granted only the minimal level of access necessary to
perform its functions. By limiting permissions, the risk of malicious activity or
accidental misuse is significantly reduced. This approach enhances security by
ensuring that if credentials are compromised, the potential impact is
minimized.
The separation of duties principle involves dividing responsibilities among
multiple identities or systems to prevent malicious activities, errors, and
unauthorized actions. By ensuring that no single entity has control over all
critical operations, this principle introduces checks and balances that enhance
oversight and security. This approach reduces the risk of insider threats and
ensures greater accountability within an organization.
Later in the chapter, you will learn how to implement these principles for your
ML workloads.
Apply Security at All Layers
The application of security at all layers embodies the defense-in-depth
principle, which is a security strategy that employs multiple layers of security
controls to protect your workload’s identities, infrastructure, and data. By
implementing several layers of defense, this approach ensures that if one layer
fails, others will continue to provide protection. This comprehensive strategy
helps to delay and mitigate potential security breaches, providing more time
for detection and response.
Figure 8.1 illustrates how you can implement this principle for a web
application exposed to the internet:
Amazon CloudFront: Acts as the content delivery network (CDN) at the
edge, distributing content globally and providing distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) protection
AWS Web Application Firewall (WAF): Protects the application from
common web exploits and attacks at the edge
Application load balancer (ALB): Distributes incoming traffic across
multiple targets, such as EC2 instances or containers
Network access control list (NACL): Provides subnet-level firewall
control, allowing or denying traffic based on specified rules
Security Group: Acts as a virtual firewall for controlling inbound and
outbound traffic at the resource level
FIGURE 8.1 Defense-in-depth principle.
The list can continue, for example, with services like Amazon GuardDuty for
threat detection, AWS Key Management Service (KMS) for data encryption,
and Amazon Inspector for continuous scanning of EC2 instances and
container images for software vulnerabilities and unintended network
exposure.
Enable Traceability
The enable traceability security principle originates from the nonrepudiation
principle, which ensures that actions and transactions cannot be denied after
they have taken place. Nonrepudiation provides proof of the integrity and
origin of data, guaranteeing that it has not been tampered with. This
foundational principle forms the basis for traceability, which is essential for
accountability and forensic analysis in any security framework.
To learn more about nonrepudiation, visit
https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/non_repudiation.
Enabling traceability involves logging and monitoring actions within your
AWS environment to maintain an accurate and comprehensive record of
activities. This principle ensures that every action taken by users, applications,
and systems is recorded and can be traced back to its origin. By enabling
traceability, organizations can detect and respond to security incidents more
effectively, as they have detailed information about what occurred and who
was responsible. AWS provides several services and tools to facilitate
traceability, such as AWS CloudTrail and Amazon CloudWatch.
As you learned in Chapter 7, AWS CloudTrail enables auditing, compliance,
and operational and risk management of your AWS accounts. As a result, this
service is a key enabler of traceability, as it records API calls made within
your AWS environment. AWS CloudTrail logs provide a detailed history of
AWS API calls, including information about the requestor, the time of the
request, and the actions performed. This helps organizations monitor and audit
their AWS resources, detect unusual activities, and investigate security
incidents. Additionally, integrating CloudTrail with Amazon S3 allows you to
store and analyze these logs for long-term retention and forensic analysis.
AWS Config is also instrumental in traceability, monitoring, and recording
changes to your resource configurations to ensure compliance and facilitate
auditing. For ML workloads, ensuring traceability also includes monitoring
model training and inference activities.
Amazon GuardDuty complements this by providing threat detection and
monitoring for malicious activity and unauthorized behavior within your AWS
environment. It uses ML, anomaly detection, and integrated threat intelligence
to identify potential security threats, ensuring your ML workloads and data are
protected.
Amazon CloudWatch complements AWS CloudTrail by providing real-time
monitoring and alerting capabilities. Amazon CloudWatch collects and tracks
metrics, collects log files, and sets alarms to help you gain visibility into your
AWS resources and applications. By analyzing Amazon CloudWatch logs and
metrics, you can identify patterns, detect anomalies, and respond to potential
security threats. Together, AWS CloudTrail, AWS Config, and Amazon
CloudWatch enable comprehensive traceability, empowering organizations to
maintain a security and compliance posture in their AWS environments.
Additionally, Amazon EventBridge can be used to centralize events from
various sources into a single location for processing, providing more
traceability and enabling automated responses to specific events. By
integrating Amazon EventBridge with your ML workflows, you can ensure
that all relevant events are captured, monitored, and acted on, enhancing the
overall security and traceability of your ML workloads.
Protect Your Data (At Rest, In Use, and In Transit)
Data protection is critical for ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of your data. These essential characteristics of your data are
referred to as the CIA Triad, and they constitute the three key tenets of any
information security strategy. This principle applies to all forms of data
storage and processing, but it is particularly important for ML workloads,
where large volumes of sensitive data are often handled. By implementing
robust security measures at every stage of the ML lifecycle, you can safeguard
your data from unauthorized access, tampering, and breaches.
To protect your data at rest, which refers to data stored on disks or other
storage devices, AWS offers several services. AWS KMS is a powerful tool
that enables you to create and manage cryptographic keys used to encrypt your
data. Native AWS KMS integration with storage services like Amazon S3,
Amazon EBS, Amazon RDS, Amazon DynamoDB, and many others ensures
that your data is encrypted at rest, providing a strong layer of protection.
As you learned in Chapter 2, Amazon S3, Amazon EFS, and Amazon FSx
for Lustre are natively integrated with Amazon SageMaker AI. These
storage services encrypt your data at rest by default, meaning all data
stored on S3 or the file system is encrypted before being written, without
any additional configuration required from the user.
Additionally, AWS Secrets Manager leverages AWS KMS to encrypt and store
sensitive information, such as database credentials and API keys, further
enhancing data security.
Data in use refers to data being actively processed or accessed by applications.
To protect data in use, AWS provides services such as AWS Nitro Enclaves,
which create isolated compute environments for processing highly sensitive
data. AWS Nitro Enclaves use hardware-based security measures to ensure
that data remains secure while in use. Moreover, you can leverage AWS IAM
to control access to data and resources, ensuring that only authorized users and
applications can interact with your ML workloads.
Protecting data in transit, or data being transmitted over networks, is equally
important. AWS offers AWS Certificate Manager (ACM) to help you
provision, manage, and deploy SSL/TLS certificates, which are essential for
encrypting data in transit. You can use ACM with services like Amazon
CloudFront, Elastic Load Balancing (ELB), and Amazon API Gateway to
ensure that data is encrypted as it travels between different points, preventing
unauthorized access and eavesdropping.
By implementing these services, you can create a comprehensive security
strategy that protects your data at every stage, ensuring confidentiality,
integrity, and availability for your ML workloads.
Automate Security Processes
Automating security processes through Policy-as-Code is a robust and modern
approach to maintaining and enforcing security controls in a consistent and
scalable manner. As the name suggests, Policy-as-Code involves defining
security policies and configurations as code, which can be version-controlled,
tested, and deployed just like application code. This approach ensures that
security policies are automatically applied and enforced across your
environment, reducing the risk of human error and enabling rapid response to
security threats. Services like AWS Config and AWS IAM let you automate
the management and enforcement of security policies, ensuring that your
infrastructure and your identities remain compliant with organizational and
regulatory requirements.
Integrating Policy-as-Code into MLOps pipelines further enhances the
security posture of your ML workloads throughout the entire ML lifecycle. As
you learned in Chapter 6, MLOps pipelines automate the process of building,
training, tuning, and deploying ML models, and by incorporating Policy-as-
Code, you can ensure that security controls are applied at every stage. For
example, you can use AWS CodePipeline and AWS CodeBuild to automate
the deployment of ML models, while simultaneously applying security
policies defined in code. This ensures that ML models are deployed in a
secure manner, with appropriate access controls, encryption, and monitoring in
place.
Automated security processes also enable continuous monitoring and
compliance (i.e., traceability) for your ML workloads. By integrating services
like Amazon GuardDuty and AWS Security Hub into your MLOps pipelines,
you can continuously monitor your ML environment for security threats and
compliance violations. These services provide real-time alerts and insights,
allowing you to quickly detect and respond to potential security issues. When
you combine these services with AWS Lambda, Amazon CloudWatch, and
Amazon EventBridge, you can automate remediation actions based on
predefined security policies, strengthening the security and resilience of your
ML workloads. This holistic approach ensures that security is an integral part
of your ML workflows in accordance with the security-by-design paradigm,
providing robust protection against evolving threats.
Prepare for Security Events
When security incidents happen, having a solid response plan for your ML
workloads is essential. Amazon Detective is a powerful tool that simplifies
security investigations by automatically collecting log data from your AWS
resources, including AWS CloudTrail and Amazon GuardDuty. It uses ML,
statistical analysis, and graph theory to build a connected dataset, helping you
quickly and efficiently investigate potential security threats. Amazon
Detective can be integrated with your incident management policies and
response simulations to ensure that your ML workloads are well-protected and
resilient against security incidents.
Securing AWS Services
Securing AWS services is paramount for safeguarding your organization’s
data, applications, and infrastructure in the cloud. A systematic and
methodical approach to security ensures comprehensive protection across all
aspects of the AWS environment. The foundation of this approach begins with
securing identities. Identity and access management are critical because they
determine who has access to your resources and what actions they can
perform. AWS IAM plays a pivotal role in this process. By creating and
managing users, groups, and roles, organizations can assign granular
permissions that control access to AWS resources. As a result, securing
identities with multifactor authentication (MFA) and adhering to the least
privilege principle strengthen your organization’s security posture, reducing
the risk of unauthorized access and potential breaches.
Following the establishment of robust identity management, the next step is to
secure the infrastructure where your ML workloads operate. AWS offers
several services to help achieve this, such as Amazon Virtual Private Cloud
(VPC) for network isolation, network access control lists (NACLs), and
security groups for controlling inbound and outbound traffic. These services
ensure that only authorized traffic can access your AWS resources.
Additionally, encrypting data at rest is a crucial aspect of securing
infrastructure. These measures collectively fortify the infrastructure against
unauthorized access and data breaches.
Securing data is another critical component of your security strategy.
Protecting data at rest, in transit, and in use is essential to maintaining its
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. AWS provides comprehensive
solutions for data security, including encryption with AWS KMS, access
controls, and continuous monitoring. For ML workloads, additional
considerations are necessary to safeguard the data used for training and
inference. Amazon SageMaker AI offers built-in security features that ensure
data protection throughout the ML lifecycle. These features include
encryption, fine-grained access controls, and real-time monitoring to detect
and mitigate potential threats.
Securing your ML workflows involves more than just data protection. It
encompasses the entire ML pipeline, from data ingestion and preprocessing to
model training and deployment. By integrating security controls into each
stage of the ML pipeline, organizations can ensure that their ML workloads
are resilient against various security threats.
Finally, ensuring compliance with organizational and regulatory requirements
is a critical aspect of a comprehensive security strategy. AWS offers several
services to help organizations maintain compliance, including AWS Config,
AWS Security Hub, and AWS Artifact. AWS Config continuously monitors
and records resource configurations, enabling organizations to assess and audit
their compliance status. AWS Security Hub provides a centralized view of the
security posture, aggregating and prioritizing security findings from multiple
AWS services and third-party products. AWS Artifact provides on-demand
downloads of auditor-issued reports, certifications, accreditations, and other
third-party attestations for AWS managed services. These include reports on
compliance with International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
standards, Payment Card Industry (PCI) security standards, and System and
Organization Controls (SOC). By leveraging these services, organizations can
ensure that their AWS environment complies with security standards and best
practices, ultimately providing a robust and secure foundation for their cloud-
based operations.
Securing Identities with IAM
AWS IAM is a web service that helps you securely control access to AWS
resources. With IAM, you can manage permissions that control which AWS
resources users can access. You use IAM to control who is authenticated
(signed in) and authorized (has permissions) to use resources. IAM provides
the infrastructure necessary to control authentication and authorization for
your AWS accounts.
With AWS, the term principal denotes a person or an application authenticated
using an IAM user or an IAM role. Access management is often referred to as
authorization. You manage access in AWS by creating policies and attaching
them to IAM identities (IAM users, IAM groups, or IAM roles) or AWS
resources.
Although the exam is focused on machine learning, you—as an ML engineer
—are required to know how to secure all the components of your ML
workflows. In the next sections, we will explore each aspect in more detail,
beginning with identities, which are the entry point to your ML workloads.
Identities
An IAM identity is a representation of a human user or a programmatic
workload that can be authenticated and authorized to perform actions within
AWS accounts. Each identity can be linked to one or more policies that define
the actions it can take, the AWS resources it can use, and the conditions under
which these actions are allowed.
With AWS, IAM identities can be IAM users, IAM groups, or IAM roles. You
can utilize AWS IAM Identity Center to create and manage identities and their
access to AWS resources. With AWS IAM Identity Center, you can also
manage permission sets, which automatically generate the necessary IAM
roles to grant access to resources.
Identities don’t have to be created in AWS. You have the option to federate
existing identities from external identity providers, such as Microsoft Entra
ID, Okta, and Cisco Duo, allowing them to assume IAM roles for accessing
AWS resources. This method enables seamless integration with external
identity providers.
Do not confuse AWS accounts and AWS identities. An AWS account acts
as a container for all your cloud resources, whereas an AWS identity refers
to an entity within that account, like an IAM user, IAM group, or IAM
role, which is assigned specific permissions to access those resources.
AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) is the service that manages
identities and access.
Let’s now review the different types of identities in AWS.
IAM Users
An IAM user is an entity that you create in your AWS account. The IAM user
represents the human user or workload who uses this entity to interact with
AWS resources. An IAM user consists of a name and credentials.
It is best practice to require human users to access AWS through
federation with an identity provider, using temporary credentials. This
approach is preferred over using IAM users with long-term credentials.
When you create an IAM user, AWS IAM Identity Center creates the
following objects:
Friendly name This is the name you used when you created the IAM
user and is displayed in the top-right corner when you access your AWS
account with this IAM user using the AWS Management Console.
Amazon Resource Name (ARN) This is the ARN for your IAM user
and is used to uniquely identify your IAM user across all of AWS. For
example, you could use an ARN to specify the IAM user as a
Principal in an IAM policy that allows the user to write to an Amazon
S3 bucket. An ARN for an IAM user might look like this:
arn:aws:iam::123456789012:user/Dario
Unique identifier This ID is returned only when you use the API,
Tools for Windows PowerShell, or AWS CLI to create the IAM user; you
do not see this ID in the console.
Each IAM user is associated with one and only one AWS account.
Because IAM users are defined within your AWS account, they don’t need
to have a payment method on file with AWS. Any AWS activity
performed by IAM users in your account is billed to your account.
IAM Roles
An IAM role is another type of IAM identity that you can create in your AWS
account. Just like an IAM user, an IAM role comes with specific permission
policies that define what actions it is allowed to perform and what resources it
is allowed to access in AWS. However, unlike an IAM user, a role is designed
to be assumed by anyone who needs it, rather than being tied to a single
identity.
Think of an IAM role as a persona, which an IAM user can impersonate
on an as-needed basis.
Additionally, a role does not have long-term credentials, such as passwords or
access keys. Instead, when you assume a role, it provides you with temporary
security credentials for the duration of your role session. This is actually a
good thing because short-term credentials limit the attack surface of your ML
workload by timeboxing the permissions granted by the assumed IAM role.
An ARN for an IAM role might look like this:
arn:aws:sts::123456789012:assumed-role/Accounting-
Role/Mario
Notice how an IAM role’s ARN uses the sts string instead of the iam
string to indicate that IAM roles consume the AWS Security Token
Service to request temporary, limited-privilege credentials for users.
IAM roles can be assumed by the following:
An IAM user in the same AWS account or another AWS account
IAM roles in the same AWS account
Service principals (IAM principals that represents an AWS service)
An external user authenticated by an identity provider (IdP)
Amazon SageMaker Role Manager
Amazon SageMaker Role Manager provides suggested permissions for a
number of ML personas, including the Data Scientist persona, MLOps
persona, and SageMaker AI Compute persona.
Each persona has suggested permissions in the form of selected ML activities
and their associate permissions, as shown in Table 8.1.
TABLE 8.1
ML Predefined Permissions.
ML Activity
Description
Access
Required AWS
Services
Permissions to access Amazon S3, Amazon ECR, Amazon
CloudWatch, and Amazon EC2. Required for execution roles
for jobs and endpoints.
Run Studio
Classic
Applications
Permissions to operate within a Studio Classic environment.
Required for domain and user profile execution roles.
Manage ML
Jobs
Permissions to audit, query lineage, and visualize
experiments.
Manage
Models
Permissions to manage SageMaker AI jobs across their
lifecycles.
Manage
Pipelines
Permissions to manage SageMaker pipelines and pipeline
executions.
Search and
visualize
experiments
Permissions to audit, query lineage, and visualize
SageMaker AI experiments.
Manage Model
Monitoring
Permissions to manage monitoring schedules for SageMaker
AI Model Monitor.
Amazon S3
Full Access
Permissions to perform all Amazon S3 operations.
Amazon S3
Bucket Access
Permissions to perform operations on specified Amazon S3
buckets.
Query Athena
Workgroups
Permissions to run and manage Amazon Athena queries.
Manage AWS
Glue Tables
Permissions to create and manage AWS Glue tables for
SageMaker AI Feature Store and Data Wrangler.
SageMaker
Canvas Core
Access
Permissions to perform experimentation in SageMaker
Canvas (i.e., basic data prep, model build, validation).
ML Activity
Description
SageMaker
Canvas Data
Preparation
(powered by
Data Wrangler)
Permissions to perform end-to-end data preparation in
SageMaker Canvas (i.e., aggregate, transform, and analyze
data; create and schedule data preparation jobs on large
datasets).
SageMaker
Canvas AI
Services
Permissions to access ready-to-use models from Amazon
Bedrock, Amazon Textract, Amazon Rekognition, and
Amazon Comprehend. Additionally, user can fine-tune
foundation models from Amazon Bedrock and Amazon
SageMaker JumpStart.
SageMaker
Canvas MLOps
Permission for SageMaker Canvas users to directly deploy
model to endpoint.
SageMaker
Canvas Kendra
Access
Permission for SageMaker Canvas to access Amazon Kendra
for enterprise document search. The permission is only given
to your selected index names in Amazon Kendra.
Use MLflow
Permissions to manage experiments, runs, and models in
MLflow.
Manage
MLflow
Tracking
Servers
Permissions to manage, start, and stop MLflow Tracking
Servers.
Access
required to
AWS Services
for MLflow
Permissions for MLflow Tracking Servers to access S3,
Secrets Manager, and Model Registry.
Run Studio
EMR
Serverless
Applications
Permissions to Create and Manage EMR Serverless
Applications on Amazon SageMaker Studio.
Data Scientist persona Use this persona to configure permissions to
perform general ML development and experimentation in a SageMaker
AI environment. This persona includes the following preselected ML
activities:
Run Studio Classic Applications
Manage ML Jobs
Manage Models
Manage AWS Glue Tables
SageMaker Canvas AI Services
SageMaker Canvas MLOps
SageMaker Canvas Kendra Access
Use MLflow
Access required to AWS Services for MLflow
Run Studio EMR Serverless Applications
MLOps persona Choose this persona to configure permissions for
operational activities. This persona includes the following preselected
ML activities:
Run Studio Classic Applications
Manage Models
Manage Pipelines
Search and visualize experiments
Amazon S3 Full Access
SageMaker AI Compute persona This persona includes the following
preselected ML activity:
Access Required AWS Services
IAM Groups
You can manage the permissions of multiple IAM users by using IAM groups.
With IAM groups, you can assign specific permissions to all members within
the group. For example, you can create an ML-Trainers group with
permissions specifically tailored for ML tasks, such as creating training jobs in
Amazon SageMaker AI. Any user added to this group will automatically
inherit those permissions. If a new ML engineer joins your organization and
needs the ability to create training jobs, you can simply add them to the ML-
Trainers group. Similarly, if an employee’s job changes, you can update their
permissions by moving them between groups without individually editing
their permissions.
Just like IAM users and IAM roles, you can also attach policies to IAM
groups, ensuring that all members receive the permissions defined in the
policy. For instance, the ML-Trainers group could have a policy that grants the
sagemaker:CreateTrainingJob permission. However, it’s important to
note that IAM groups cannot be identified as principals in a policy because
IAM groups are related to permissions, not authentication. Principals are
authenticated IAM entities and are represented by individual IAM users or
IAM roles.
Now that you understand the concept of identity, you may wonder how AWS
knows that a given IAM user/role/group is allowed to perform an action (e.g.,
write) on a specific AWS resource (e.g., an Amazon S3 bucket). This is where
the concept of access policy comes into play, which will be covered in the next
section.
Access Policies
Access policies (or simply policies) constitute the key component of
authorization in AWS. A policy in AWS is an object that specifies the
permissions for an identity or resource it is associated with. When a principal
(such as an IAM user or IAM role) makes a request upon successful
authentication, AWS evaluates the policies associated with its identity to
determine whether the request should be allowed or denied. The outcome of
this evaluation is referred to as the effect of the policy, and its values are allow
or deny. The permissions outlined in the policy are referred to as the action
and govern what the principal is allowed to perform on the AWS resource
specified in the policy. A policy may also have a condition, which specifies
the condition under which the policy is in effect.
Most of these policies are stored as JSON documents in AWS.
The policies you need to know for the exam are outlined in the upcoming
sections. For more information about access policies, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/access_po
licies.html#access_policy-types.
Identity-Based Policies
Identity-based policies are JSON documents that control what actions an
identity (IAM users, IAM groups, and IAM roles) can perform, on which
AWS resources, and under what conditions. The following example shows a
JSON policy that allows the IAM user to perform all Amazon DynamoDB
actions (dynamodb:*) on the Vehicles table (table/Vehicles) in the
123456789012 account within the us-east-1 Region:
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": {
    "Effect": "Allow",
    "Action": "dynamodb:*",
    "Resource": "arn:aws:dynamodb:us-east-
1:123456789012:table/Vehicles"
  }
}
Upon attaching this policy to your IAM user, the user will have permission to
perform all actions on the Vehicles table in your DynamoDB instance.
Typically, IAM users have multiple policies that collectively define their
overall permissions.
Actions or resources not explicitly permitted by a policy are denied by default.
For instance, if the previous policy is the only one attached to an IAM user,
they can perform DynamoDB actions on the Vehicles table but cannot interact
with other tables. Similarly, the user is restricted from performing actions in
Amazon EC2, Amazon S3, or any other AWS service, as the policy does not
grant permissions for these services.
Resource-based Policies
Resource-based policies are JSON documents that you attach to an AWS
resource instead of an AWS identity. These policies grant the specified
principal permission to perform specific actions on that resource and defines
under what conditions these apply.
The following JSON document is an example of an AWS resource-based
policy for an S3 bucket that grants the principal
arn:aws:iam::123456789012:user/Dario permissions to write to a
bucket your-unique-bucket-name:
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": {
                "AWS": 
"arn:aws:iam::123456789012:user/Dario"
            },
            "Action": "s3:PutObject",
            "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::your-unique-bucket-
name/*"
        }
    ]
}
In this policy:
The Effect is set to Allow, which means the action is permitted.
The Principal specifies the IAM user Dario with the ARN
arn:aws:iam::123456789012:user/Dario.
The Action is s3:PutObject, which allows the user to write objects to
the bucket.
The Resource specifies the ARN of the bucket and includes the
wildcard (*) to allow writing to any object within the bucket.
Replace your-unique-bucket-name with the actual name of your S3
bucket.
Not all AWS resources support resource-based policies. To learn more,
visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/refere
nce_aws-services-that-work-with-iam.html#all_svcs.
Permission Boundaries
A permissions boundary is an advanced IAM feature that defines the
maximum permissions an identity-based policy can grant to an IAM identity.
When a permissions boundary is set for an IAM identity, the entity can only
perform actions that are permitted by both its identity-based policies and the
permissions boundary.
The following JSON document is an example of a permission boundary policy
that limits the IAM user Dario to only use DynamoDB, S3, and CloudWatch
services:
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "dynamodb:*",
                "s3:*",
                "cloudwatch:*"
            ],
            "Resource": "*"
        }
    ]
}
When you attach this permission boundary policy to the IAM user Dario, it
limits the user’s permissions but does not provide permissions on its own. In
this example, the policy sets the maximum permissions of Dario as all
operations in Amazon DynamoDB, Amazon S3, and Amazon CloudWatch.
Dario can never perform operations in any other service, including IAM, even
if he has a permissions policy that allows it.
Service Control Policies
If your AWS account is part of a large organization with multiple accounts
designed to fulfill different business functions, you have the ability to
implement Service Control Policies (SCPs) as a consistent way to manage
permissions across your entire organization.
AWS Organizations is a service that allows you to centrally manage and
govern multiple AWS accounts within your organization. It enables you to
consolidate billing, apply SCPs for fine-grained control over account
permissions, and automate account provisioning and management. You
should use AWS Organizations when you need to manage multiple
accounts for your business, ensuring consistent security and compliance
across all accounts. AWS Control Tower extends the capabilities of AWS
Organizations by providing a preconfigured, secure, and compliant multi-
account environment. It offers automated account setup (Account
Factory), centralized security, and governance best practices, making it
easier to manage and govern multi-account AWS environments. To learn
more, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/controltower/latest/usergui
de/what-is-control-tower.html.
SCPs are powerful tools that allow you to define the maximum permissions
for IAM users and roles within the accounts of your organization or
organizational units (OUs). These JSON policies act as guardrails that set the
boundaries for what actions can and cannot be performed, providing an
additional layer of control, security, and compliance. For example, to enforce
an organization policy that only allows EC2 instances to be created in a
specific region for accounts within a designated OU, you would create an SCP
that explicitly denies the ec2:RunInstances action for any region other than
the designated one, applying this SCP to the relevant OU within your AWS
organization. By using SCPs, you can ensure that only approved actions are
allowed, thereby reducing the risk of accidental or malicious activities.
Furthermore, SCPs can be applied to all principals within the member
accounts, including the AWS account root user. This means that even if a user
has permissions granted through other policies, an explicit deny in an SCP will
override any allows, effectively restricting their actions. SCPs are particularly
useful for enforcing compliance and governance across large and complex
organizations. By centrally managing permissions, you can streamline security
operations and maintain consistent policies across all accounts, ensuring that
your AWS environment remains secure and well-regulated.
To learn more about SCPs, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/organizations/latest/userguide
/orgs_manage_policies_scps.html.
Securing Infrastructure and Data
Securing infrastructure in AWS is essential for protecting sensitive data and
ensuring the integrity of ML workflows. One of the fundamental components
of AWS security is the Virtual Private Cloud (VPC), which provides network
isolation by creating a logically isolated section of the AWS cloud where you
can launch AWS resources in a virtual network that you define. VPCs enable
you to control the network settings, such as IP address ranges, subnets, route
tables, and gateways, providing a secure environment for your ML
infrastructure.
Network Isolation with VPCs
A VPC is the cornerstone of network isolation in AWS. Upon creating a VPC,
you can launch AWS resources such as Amazon SageMaker notebooks,
training jobs, and inference endpoints within a logically isolated network. This
isolation allows you to define your IP address ranges, create subnets, and
configure route tables, ensuring that your ML resources are securely
segmented from other parts of the AWS network and external networks.
Within a VPC, NACLs serve as stateless firewalls that control inbound and
outbound traffic at the subnet level. Stateless means that information about
previously sent or received traffic is not saved. NACLs allow you to define
rules that explicitly permit or deny traffic based on IP addresses, protocols,
and ports. This additional layer of security is aligned with the defense-in-depth
principle and helps protect your ML infrastructure from unauthorized access
and potential threats.
You can associate a NACL with multiple subnets. However, a subnet can
be associated with only one NACL at a time.
Security groups act as stateful firewalls for your ML instances, controlling
inbound and outbound traffic at the instance level. Stateful means that
information about previously sent or received traffic is saved. As a result, if a
security group allows incoming traffic on port 443 to an EC2 instance,
responses are automatically returned regardless of outbound security group
rules. Security groups can be attached to various AWS resources, such as
Amazon EC2 instances, Amazon RDS instances, Amazon Elastic Load
Balancers (ELBs), and Amazon SageMaker notebooks. By defining security
group rules, you can specify which traffic is allowed to reach your ML
resources. These rules can also be based on IP addresses, protocols, and ports,
ensuring that only authorized traffic can access your ML infrastructure. A key
feature of security groups is the ability to reference other security groups or
defined prefix lists as a source in rules. This allows you to manage access to
groups of resources without needing to know their specific IP addresses, as in
the case of an ELB with dynamically assigned IPs.
You can associate multiple security groups with a single EC2 instance,
effectively allowing you to manage inbound and outbound traffic with
granular control by combining the rules from each security group.
Private Connectivity
Private connectivity options, such as VPC interface endpoints and gateway
endpoints, further enhance the security of your ML infrastructure by enabling
private connections to AWS services without traversing the public internet.
VPC interface endpoints use AWS PrivateLink to create private connections to
AWS services, such as Amazon S3 and Amazon SageMaker AI, within your
VPC. However, AWS PrivateLink is not limited to private connectivity to
AWS services. With this service, you can also create private connections to
user-defined services across different VPCs and AWS accounts, enabling
secure sharing of services without exposing traffic to the public internet. This
approach reduces the risk of data exposure and improves data security by
ensuring that traffic remains within the AWS network. Similarly, VPC
gateway endpoints provide private connectivity to AWS services that are
accessible via the AWS Management Console, API, and CLI, such as Amazon
S3 and Amazon DynamoDB. By using gateway endpoints, you can ensure that
data traffic between your VPC and these services is secure and private.
Data Protection
In addition to network and security isolation, it is crucial to implement
encryption for data at rest, in use, and in transit to protect sensitive ML data.
AWS KMS allows you to create and manage cryptographic keys that can be
used to encrypt data stored in various AWS services, such as Amazon S3,
Amazon RDS, and Amazon EBS. Additionally, AWS provides SSL/TLS
encryption for data in transit, ensuring that data remains secure while being
transferred between your ML infrastructure and other AWS services or
external systems.
ACM further simplifies the process of provisioning, managing, and deploying
SSL/TLS certificates for your websites and applications. You can use ACM to
easily obtain and renew certificates and ensure secure communication between
your ML infrastructure and users or other systems. Implementing encryption
helps maintain the confidentiality and integrity of your ML data, preventing
unauthorized access and tampering.
Monitoring and Auditing
Monitoring and auditing are also vital components of securing ML
infrastructure in AWS. As you learned in Chapter 7, AWS provides several
services, such as AWS CloudTrail and Amazon CloudWatch, to help you
monitor and log activities within your VPC and ML infrastructure. AWS
CloudTrail enables you to track API calls and user activities, providing a
detailed audit trail that can be used for compliance and security analysis.
Amazon CloudWatch allows you to collect and monitor metrics, set alarms,
and gain insights into the performance and health of your ML infrastructure.
With these monitoring and auditing tools, you can proactively detect and
respond to security incidents, ensuring the ongoing protection and integrity of
your ML workflows.
Ensuring Compliance
Amazon SageMaker AI is designed to meet a variety of industry standards and
regulatory requirements, making it a suitable choice for organizations with
stringent compliance needs. In the United States, Amazon SageMaker AI
supports compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA), which is essential for handling sensitive healthcare data. This
ensures that organizations in the healthcare sector can securely manage and
analyze patient information while adhering to HIPAA’s stringent privacy and
security rules.
Another key compliance framework supported by Amazon SageMaker AI is
the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS). This standard
is critical for organizations that handle payment card information, as it sets
requirements for securing cardholder data. By adhering to PCI DSS,
organizations can ensure that their ML workflows involving payment data are
secure and compliant with industry standards.
Moreover, Amazon SageMaker AI complies with ISO 27001, an international
standard for information security management systems. This certification
demonstrates that Amazon SageMaker AI follows best practices for managing
information security, including risk assessment, management, and continuous
improvement. Compliance with ISO 27001 ensures that organizations can
trust Amazon SageMaker AI to protect their data and maintain robust security
measures.
In addition to these frameworks, Amazon SageMaker AI supports compliance
with several other regulatory standards, including SOC 1, SOC 2, SOC 3,
FedRAMP, GDPR, and others. This wide range of compliance certifications
makes Amazon SageMaker AI a versatile and secure platform for various
industries, ensuring that organizations can meet their regulatory obligations
while leveraging advanced ML capabilities.
You can leverage AWS Artifact to obtain third-party attestations and reports
that validate your compliance status with respect to the aforementioned
frameworks.
For more details on the compliance frameworks supported by Amazon
SageMaker AI, you can visit the Compliance validation for Amazon
SageMaker AI page at
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/sagemaker-
compliance.html.
For security compliance best practices, visit the Security Best Practices for
Amazon SageMaker AI page at
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/config/latest/developerguide/s
ecurity-best-practices-for-SageMaker.html.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the importance of securing ML models with
Amazon SageMaker AI and the various aspects involved in achieving this.
Securing ML models requires a holistic approach that leverages a security-by-
design strategy, which is founded on security design principles such as least
privilege, separation of duties, and defense in depth. These principles ensure
that users and applications have only the necessary permissions, multiple
layers of security are implemented, and security controls are integrated into
the architecture from the outset.
Managing identities and access control is crucial for securing ML resources in
Amazon SageMaker AI. AWS IAM allows you to create and manage policies
that define permissions for users, groups, and roles, ensuring that only
authorized users can access specific Amazon SageMaker AI resources.
Implementing MFA adds an extra layer of security, and creating permission
boundaries and SCPs helps enforce organizational security policies and restrict
access to critical resources. This ensures that your ML identities are managed
securely and effectively.
Securing the infrastructure supporting ML workflows involves implementing
network isolation and using appropriate security controls. VPCs provide
network isolation, whereas NACLs and security groups act as firewalls
controlling traffic at the subnet and instance levels. Private connectivity
options, such as VPC interface endpoints and gateway endpoints, enable
secure connections to AWS services without exposing data to the public
internet. Monitoring and logging services like AWS CloudTrail and Amazon
CloudWatch help you track and audit network activities, ensuring that
potential security incidents are promptly detected and addressed.
Lastly, protecting data and ensuring compliance are critical aspects of securing
ML models and workflows. AWS KMS allows you to create and manage
cryptographic keys for encrypting data at rest, whereas SSL/TLS encryption
ensures data in transit remains secure. ACM simplifies the process of
provisioning, managing, and deploying SSL/TLS certificates. Amazon
SageMaker AI supports various compliance frameworks, including HIPAA,
PCI DSS, ISO 27001, SOC 1, SOC 2, SOC 3, FedRAMP, and GDPR,
ensuring that your ML environment adheres to relevant industry standards and
data residency regulations. By addressing each of these areas, you can build a
secure and compliant ML infrastructure with Amazon SageMaker AI,
protecting your models, infrastructure, and data from potential threats and
vulnerabilities.
Exam Essentials
Know the difference between IAM users, IAM roles, and IAM groups. 
An IAM user is an AWS identity that represents an individual person or
service that interacts with AWS resources. IAM users have long-term
credentials like passwords or access keys. IAM roles are identities that can be
assumed by IAM users or other roles and use temporary security tokens for
access. This makes them ideal for granting temporary permissions to identities
such as applications or users that need to assume different sets of permissions.
Lastly, IAM groups are identities representing collections of IAM users that
share common permissions.
Know the elements of an AWS access policy. An AWS access policy is a
JSON document that defines permissions for an IAM identity (IAM user, IAM
group, or IAM role) or an AWS resource. The main elements of an access
policy include Version, which specifies the policy language
version; Statement, which contains one or more individual
permissions; Effect, which can be either Allow or Deny to grant or restrict
access; Action, which specifies the API operations allowed or denied;
Resource, which specifies the AWS resources to which the actions apply;
and Condition, which optionally specifies the conditions under which the
policy is in effect. Together, these elements outline what actions are permitted
or denied for specified resources under defined conditions.
Know the different access policy types. Identity-based policies are
attached directly to IAM users, IAM groups, or IAM roles and define what
actions they can perform on which resources. Resource-based policies are
attached to AWS resources like Amazon S3 buckets and specify who can
access those resources and what actions they can take. Permissions boundaries
are advanced policies that set the maximum permissions an identity-based
policy can grant to an IAM user or IAM role. Service Control Policies (SCPs)
are used within AWS Organizations to manage permissions across all accounts
and organizational units, defining what actions can be performed by the
accounts’ users and roles.
Know what Amazon SageMaker Role Manager is. Amazon SageMaker
Role Manager is a tool that simplifies the creation and management of IAM
roles tailored for ML workflows. It allows ML administrators to define
persona-based roles with predefined permissions for common ML activities.
Personas include Data Scientist, MLOps, and SageMaker AI Compute. With
Amazon SageMaker Role Manager, you can ensure least privilege access,
granting only the necessary permissions for specific tasks. This helps
streamline security management and ensures that different users have
appropriate access levels for their roles within Amazon SageMaker AI.
Know the difference between NACLs and security groups. Network
access control lists are stateless firewalls that control traffic at the subnet level,
allowing or denying traffic based on IP address, protocol, and port. With
NACLs, both inbound and outbound rules must be defined. Security groups,
on the other hand, are stateful firewalls that control traffic at the instance level,
allowing traffic based on IP address, protocol, and port. Due to their stateful
nature, security groups always return traffic automatically.
Know the ways to implement private connectivity in a VPC. Private
connectivity in an AWS VPC can be implemented using VPC endpoints,
which enable secure, private connections between your VPC and supported
AWS services without traversing the public Internet. There are two types of
VPC endpoints: interface endpoints and gateway endpoints. Interface
endpoints use AWS PrivateLink to provide private access to services such as
Amazon S3, Amazon SageMaker AI, and Amazon EC2 through an elastic
network interface within your VPC. Gateway endpoints provide private
connectivity to services like Amazon S3 and Amazon DynamoDB by adding
route entries to your VPC route tables. By using these endpoints, you can
ensure that your data traffic remains secure and private within the AWS
network.
Review Questions
1. What is the main difference between IAM roles and IAM users when it
comes to access credentials?
A. IAM users have temporary security credentials, and IAM roles have
long-term credentials.
B. IAM roles provide temporary security credentials, and IAM users
have long-term credentials.
C. Both IAM roles and users have long-term security credentials.
D. Both IAM roles and users have temporary security credentials.
2. Which AWS service allows you to monitor compliance with internal
policies and regulatory standards in Amazon SageMaker AI?
A. Amazon GuardDuty
B. AWS Config
C. AWS CloudTrail
D. Amazon Inspector
3. What key distinction separates security groups from network access
control lists (NACLs)?
A. Security groups operate at the instance level and are stateless,
whereas NACLs operate at the subnet level and are stateful.
B. Security groups operate at the subnet level and are stateless, whereas
NACLs operate at the instance level and are stateful.
C. Security groups operate at the instance level and are stateful,
whereas NACLs operate at the subnet level and are stateless.
D. Security groups operate at the subnet level and are stateful, whereas
NACLs operate at the instance level and are stateless.
4. Which personas are predefined using Amazon SageMaker Role
Manager?
A. Data Scientist and MLOps
B. System Administrator and Network Engineer
C. Financial Analyst and HR Manager
D. Marketing Specialist and Sales Representative
5. What is a key benefit of using AWS PrivateLink for secure
communication between VPCs and AWS services?
A. It enables Internet access to AWS services.
B. It creates public endpoints for AWS services.
C. It provides private connectivity without exposing data to the public
Internet.
D. It manages network traffic within a VPC.
6. How do Service Control Policies (SCPs) enhance security within an AWS
Organization?
A. By providing detailed logs of API calls
B. By enforcing maximum permissions for member accounts
C. By encrypting data at rest
D. By monitoring traffic within the VPC
7. Which AWS service helps enforce compliance for training data residency
requirements in a machine learning application within a multi-account
environment?
A. AWS CloudTrail with identity-based policies
B. AWS Config with resource-based policies
C. AWS Control Tower with Service Control Policies
D. Amazon CloudWatch with Access Control Lists
8. What is the role of AWS KMS in securing machine learning data in
Amazon SageMaker AI?
A. To generate detailed audit logs of API calls
B. To monitor the performance of ML models
C. To create and manage cryptographic keys for data encryption
D. To control traffic between subnets and instances
9. Which AWS service is primarily used for tracking and logging API calls
and activities for security and compliance auditing?
A. AWS Shield
B. AWS CloudTrail
C. AWS CloudFormation
D. Amazon CloudWatch
10. Which security strategy emphasizes incorporating security considerations
from the initial stages of design and development?
A. Defense in depth
B. Least privilege
C. Security by design
D. Multifactor authentication (MFA)
