Chapter 6
Model Deployment and Orchestration
THE AWS CERTIFIED MACHINE LEARNING (ML)
ENGINEER ASSOCIATE EXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED
IN THIS CHAPTER MAY INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT
LIMITED TO, THE FOLLOWING:
✔ Domain 3: Deployment and Orchestration of ML Workflows
3.1 Select deployment infrastructure based on existing
architecture and requirements
3.2 Create and script infrastructure based on existing
architecture and requirements
3.3 Use automated orchestration tools to set up continuous
integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipelines
AWS Model Deployment Services
In the previous chapter, you learned how to train and how to evaluate the
performance of your model. You learned different training approaches to
ensure that your chosen model has sufficient amounts of data to learn patterns
and relationships between features and labels for supervised ML problems, as
well as how it can uncover hidden structures and patterns in unsupervised ML
problems.
Now, it’s time to move forward and explore how to deploy these models
effectively. Model deployment is the integration of your model and all its
resources into a production environment so it can be used to generate
predictions, or inferences.
In this chapter, we will delve into the Deploy Model and Derive Inference
phases, as illustrated in Figure 6.1. These phases are essential for delivering
the insights and predictions your model is capable of.
FIGURE 6.1 The machine learning lifecycle.
Throughout the chapter we will use the term “ML app” to denote the
application responsible for producing inferences in response to inference
requests. This application will receive inference requests as input, will pass
this data to the model, and will eventually return inference responses upon
receiving an output from the model.
I used the term eventually to indicate that the response produced by the ML
app (after consuming the model) will be returned to the requestor “one way or
the other.” This may happen immediately (in real time), in near real time (with
a few seconds delay), or after an undetermined period of time. In the last
scenario, the processing of the inferences usually occurs in batches, because
the requestor does not expect an immediate response. As a result, the period it
takes for the ML app to return inferences depends on—among other factors—
the batch size (how many inference requests are being batched?) and the
amount of data for each inference request, also referred to as the payload.
Depending on your specific use case, you may choose to leverage Amazon AI
Services that use pretrained models and obtain inferences by invoking directly
their APIs, or you may choose to expose your model with an endpoint
provided by Amazon SageMaker, now referred to as Amazon SageMaker AI.
Either way, it is critical that the deployment approach you pursue complies
with well-architected best practices. This means ensuring that your
organization’s teams support efficient development and workload
management, protecting your identities, data, infrastructure, and applications
with robust security measures and maintaining the expected levels of
reliability metrics. Additionally, it’s essential to use resources efficiently to
meet system requirements, minimize costs by avoiding unnecessary expenses,
and adopt sustainable practices to reduce your environmental impact. By
adhering to these principles of operational excellence, security, reliability,
performance efficiency, cost optimization, and sustainability, you can build a
performant, robust, secure, and cost-effective model deployment that aligns
with your organizational goals and environmental responsibilities.
Let’s start the chapter with deployment techniques for Amazon AI services.
Deploying AI Services
Although Amazon SageMaker AI is often used to build, train, and deploy
custom ML models, it also integrates seamlessly with several fully managed
AI services provided by AWS. As you learned in Chapter 4, these services
offer pretrained models that can be easily incorporated into your applications
via API calls.
For the exam, it’s important to know that these pretrained models are
hosted in managed AWS accounts owned by the respective services, so
there is limited access to them. These models are exposed for consumption
in the form of API calls.
This section explores how these AI services can be effectively deployed with
your ML applications.
Amazon Rekognition
Amazon Rekognition offers pretrained models for image and video analysis.
Deploying Amazon Rekognition involves making API calls to the service to
analyze images and videos for objects, faces, text, and scenes. Amazon
SageMaker AI can be used to orchestrate these API calls within your ML
workflows, ensuring seamless integration with your applications. The
orchestration aspect is a key requirement of the exam and will be covered in
detail at the end of this chapter. This approach allows for scalable image and
video processing without needing direct access to the underlying models.
The following snippet provides an example of how to use Amazon
Rekognition:
import boto3
         
client = boto3.client('rekognition')
       
response = client.detect_labels(
    Image={'S3Object': {'Bucket': 'your-bucket-name', 
'Name': 'your-image.jpg'}},
    MaxLabels=10,
    MinConfidence=75
)
       
for label in response['Labels']:
    print(f"Label: {label['Name']}, Confidence: 
{label['Confidence']}")
To get started with Amazon Rekognition using Python, you’ll first need to set
up your environment by installing and configuring the AWS SDK for Python,
known as boto3. Amazon SageMaker Studio Code Editor comes with boto3
preinstalled.
Once your environment is ready, import the boto3 library, and create a client
for the Rekognition service using the statement client =
boto3.client('rekognition'). Next, prepare your data by uploading the
images or videos you want to analyze to an Amazon S3 bucket. With your
data in place, you can call the detect_labels API method to analyze the
images and identify objects, scenes, and activities. The Image parameter
specifies the S3 bucket and file name, whereas the MaxLabels and
MinConfidence parameters define the maximum number of labels to return
and the minimum confidence level for the detected labels. The API call returns
a response object, which includes the identified labels and their
corresponding confidence scores (response['Labels']), which you can
print or use in your application for further processing. With the provided code
you learned how to use Amazon Rekognition to analyze an image stored in an
S3 bucket and print the detected labels and their confidence scores.
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/rekognition/latest/APIReferenc
e/Welcome.html.
Amazon Textract
Amazon Textract provides pretrained models for extracting text and data from
scanned documents. To use Amazon Textract, create a client using the
statement client = boto3.client('textract'). Key methods include
analyze_document, detect_document_text, and
get_document_analysis for processing documents. Here’s an example of
using the analyze_document method:
import boto3
        
client = boto3.client('textract')
          
response = client.analyze_document(
    Document={'S3Object': {'Bucket': 'your-bucket-name', 
'Name': 'your-document.pdf'}},
    FeatureTypes=['TABLES', 'FORMS']
)
        
for block in response['Blocks']:
    if block['BlockType'] == 'LINE':
        print(block['Text'])
For more information, visit:
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/textract/latest/dg/API_Referen
ce.html.
Amazon Polly
Amazon Polly converts text into lifelike speech using pretrained models. To
use Amazon Polly, create a client using the statement client =
boto3.client('polly'). Key methods include synthesize_speech,
describe_voices, and list_lexicons for generating speech. Here’s an
example of using the synthesize_speech method:
import boto3
       
client = boto3.client('polly')
         
response = client.synthesize_speech(
    Text='Hello, world!',
    OutputFormat='mp3',
    VoiceId='Joanna'
)
          
with open('speech.mp3', 'wb') as file:
    file.write(response['AudioStream'].read())
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/polly/latest/dg/API_Reference.
html.
Amazon Transcribe
Amazon Transcribe offers pretrained models for speech-to-text conversion. To
use Amazon Transcribe, create a client using the statement client =
boto3.client('transcribe'). Key methods include
start_transcription_job, get_transcription_job, and
list_transcription_jobs for managing transcription tasks. Here’s an
example of using the start_transcription_job method:
import boto3
       
client = boto3.client('transcribe')
      
response = client.start_transcription_job(
    TranscriptionJobName='TranscriptionJob',
    Media={'MediaFileUri': 's3://your-bucket-name/your-
audio-file.mp3'},
    MediaFormat='mp3',
    LanguageCode='en-US'
)
          
# Wait for the job to complete and retrieve the transcript
while True:
    status =
client.get_transcription_job(TranscriptionJobName='Transcr
iptionJob')
    if status['TranscriptionJob']
['TranscriptionJobStatus'] in ['COMPLETED', 'FAILED']:
        break
           
print(status['TranscriptionJob']['Transcript']
['TranscriptFileUri'])
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/transcribe/latest/APIReference
/Welcome.html.
Amazon Comprehend
Amazon Comprehend offers pretrained models for natural language
processing tasks such as sentiment analysis, entity recognition, and key phrase
extraction. To use Amazon Comprehend, create a client using the statement
client = boto3.client('comprehend'). Key methods include
detect_sentiment, detect_entities, and detect_key_phrases for
analyzing text. Here’s an example of using the detect_sentiment method:
import boto3
         
client = boto3.client('comprehend')
     
response = client.detect_sentiment(
    Text='I love using Amazon Comprehend!',
    LanguageCode='en'
)
      
print(f"Sentiment: {response['Sentiment']}, Score: 
{response['SentimentScore']}")
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/comprehend/latest/APIReference
/welcome.html.
Amazon Lex
Amazon Lex provides pretrained models for building conversational interfaces
using voice and text. To use Amazon Lex, create a client using the statement
client = boto3.client('lexv2-runtime'). A key method is
recognize_text for managing interactions with your chatbot. Here’s an
example of using the recognize_text method:
import boto3
      
client = boto3.client('lexv2-runtime')
          
response = client.recognize_text(
    botId='YourBotId',
    botAliasId='YourBotAliasId',
    localeId='en_US',
    sessionId='User123',
    text='I would like to book a flight'
)
        
print(f"Bot Response: {response['messages'][0]
['content']}")
          
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lexv2/latest/APIReference/welc
ome.html.
Amazon Personalize
Amazon Personalize offers pretrained models for creating individualized
recommendations. To use Amazon Personalize, create a client using the
statement client = boto3.client('personalize'). Key methods
include get_recommendations, get_personalized_ranking, and
create_campaign for managing recommendation tasks. Here’s an example
of using the get_recommendations method:
import boto3
      
client = boto3.client('personalize')
       
response = client.get_recommendations(
    campaignArn='your-campaign-arn',
    userId='User123'
)
     
for item in response['itemList']:
    print(f"Recommended Item: {item['itemId']}, Score: 
{item['score']}")
For more information, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/personalize/latest/dg/API_Refe
rence.html.
Amazon Bedrock
Amazon Bedrock provides a secure and scalable framework for deploying and
managing foundation models (FMs). To derive inference using Amazon
Bedrock models, you can create a client using the statement client =
boto3.client('bedrock-runtime'). Amazon Bedrock enables two
primary approaches for deploying models: using agents and the Converse API.
Using Agents
Agents in Amazon Bedrock act as intermediaries between your application and
the foundation model. They allow you to define specific tasks, behaviors, and
interactions, providing a comprehensive framework for managing and
orchestrating various types of models. The process involves creating an agent,
configuring it with the tasks it will perform, and creating an alias for the agent
to interact with your application. This approach is ideal for complex
workflows and tasks that require extensive management and orchestration.
Using the Converse API
On the other hand, the Converse API is designed specifically for
conversational interactions. It provides a direct way to manage text-based
interactions by sending input text to the model and receiving responses. The
Converse API is well-suited for use cases such as chatbots, virtual assistants,
and customer service applications where conversational AI is the primary
requirement. Here’s an example of using the Converse API:
import boto3
    
# Create a Bedrock client
client = boto3.client('bedrock-runtime')
      
# Invoke the Converse API
     
response = client.converse(
    modelId='your-model-id'',   # Replace with your model 
ID
    messages=[{
        'role': 'user',
        'content':[
            {
                'text': 'Create a list of ten bestselling 
books about Calculus'
            }
        ]
    }]
)
         
print(f"Model Response: {response['output']['message']
['content'][0]['text']}")
This snippet demonstrates how to create an Amazon Bedrock client, invoke
the Converse API with the input text, and print the model’s response. The
Converse API provides a streamlined approach for conversational interactions,
making it a suitable alternative for scenarios where agents might be too
complex.
For more information on using Amazon Bedrock’s boto3 API, you can refer to
the Amazon Bedrock User Guide:
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/getti
ng-started-api.html.
Deploying Your Model
In the previous section, you learned how to deploy AI services provided by
AWS. In this section, we will explore a more customized approach tailored to
your specific use case, where you have built and fine-tuned your own model
and now it’s ready for deployment. The deployment phase is critical as it
ensures that your ML model is accessible and can deliver predictions on new
data in real time or batch mode. Amazon SageMaker AI offers robust and
flexible deployment options that cater to various requirements, ranging from
fully managed services to more customizable, self-managed solutions.
Managed model deployments in Amazon SageMaker AI provide a streamlined
and hassle-free way to deploy your models. With managed endpoints, Amazon
SageMaker AI takes care of all the underlying infrastructure, including
provisioning, scaling, and load balancing, ensuring high availability and fault
tolerance. This approach allows you to focus on your application’s logic and
performance without worrying about the operational aspects of deploying and
maintaining your model. Managed deployments are ideal for production
environments where reliability and scalability are paramount.
Unmanaged model deployments offer greater flexibility and control over the
deployment process. By leveraging Amazon SageMaker AI’s powerful SDKs
and APIs, you can deploy your models on custom infrastructure that fits your
unique needs. This approach is suitable for scenarios where you require
specific configurations, custom networking setups, or integration with existing
systems. Unmanaged deployments give you the freedom to optimize resource
allocation and cost while maintaining full control over the deployment
lifecycle.
Choosing the right infrastructure (type and size) to support your deployments
depends on several key criteria: scalability, ease of management,
customization needs, security, and cost considerations. Managed deployments
are ideal for applications requiring high availability and effortless scaling, as
they offload the operational burden to Amazon SageMaker AI. This option is
best for teams looking for a hassle-free, production-ready solution.
Conversely, unmanaged deployments offer greater flexibility and control,
making them suitable for complex configurations or integration with existing
systems. This approach allows for fine-tuned resource allocation and cost
optimization. Evaluating these criteria will help determine the most suitable
deployment strategy for your specific use case.
Infrastructure Selection Considerations
Because the main purpose of deploying your model is to derive inferences, it
is important to understand the computational aspects of inference and how
they are different from training.
Inference is the phase where a trained model is utilized to make predictions on
testing samples, involving a forward pass similar to the one used during
training to generate predictions. However, unlike training, inference does not
include a backward pass to calculate errors or update the model’s weights (or
other internal parameters) to minimize the loss function.
As a result, there are some important differences between inferencing and
training that you need to know for the exam. This understanding will help you
select the most suitable infrastructure for each use case. Table 6.1 summarizes
these differences.
TABLE 6.1
Inference and Training Comparison.
Inference compute
Training compute
Runs on single real-time
endpoints (except batch
inference)
Requires high parallelism with large batch
processing for higher throughput
Less compute
More compute
Less memory
More memory
Runs ubiquitously (on devices at
the edge and in the cloud)
Runs in the cloud
Runs all the time
Runs as needed (trains once, retrain
infrequently)
Integrated into ML app stack
Standalone
In short, training infrastructure in ML is designed for high computational
power to handle extensive data processing and model optimization, whereas
inferencing infrastructure prioritizes low latency and efficiency for real-time
or batch prediction tasks.
Managed Model Deployments
Hosting a model in Amazon SageMaker AI, known as managed model
deployments, offers numerous benefits that streamline the ML deployment
process. By using Amazon SageMaker AI, you leverage the power of AWS to
manage the underlying infrastructure, enabling you to focus more on
developing and refining your models rather than handling the complexities of
deployment. Amazon SageMaker AI provides a robust, scalable, and secure
environment that ensures that your models can handle varying workloads and
deliver reliable inferences. The service handles infrastructure provisioning,
scaling, load balancing, and health monitoring, significantly reducing
operational overhead.
Amazon SageMaker AI’s managed model deployment options are highlighted
in Figure 6.2 and include Batch Inference, Asynchronous Inference, Serverless
Inference, and Real-time Inference.
FIGURE 6.2 Amazon SageMaker AI managed model deployment
types.
Each of these deployment types caters to different use cases, providing
flexibility and efficiency based on your ML problem’s unique requirements.
With managed endpoints, you benefit from automatic scaling and integration
with other AWS services, such as Identity and Access Management (IAM) for
secure access control and Amazon CloudWatch for monitoring and logging.
Amazon SageMaker AI’s seamless integration with the AWS ecosystem
ensures that your models are not only robust but also compliant with best
practices in security, performance, and cost optimization in accordance with
the pillars of the AWS Well-Architected Framework.
An essential aspect of all Amazon SageMaker AI’s model deployment options
is the reliance on containers. Containers encapsulate the model and its
dependencies, ensuring a consistent environment across different stages of the
ML lifecycle. This approach provides flexibility and portability, enabling
seamless transitions from development to production.
Additionally, the trained and evaluated model artifacts, typically saved as
model.tar.gz, play a crucial role in deployments. This artifact contains the
model parameters and any other necessary files required for inference. When
you deploy a model in Amazon SageMaker AI, the service decompresses this
artifact in the preconfigured instances to make the model ready to serve
inference requests. This process ensures that all components of the model are
intact and can be accessed efficiently during inference.
Now, let’s dive into the specifics of each deployment method.
Real-Time Inference
Real-time inference in Amazon SageMaker AI is designed to provide instant
predictions for incoming inference requests. This deployment approach is best
suited for applications that require low-latency responses in the form of small
payloads, such as fraud detection, recommendation systems, and interactive
applications.
For real-time inference, Amazon SageMaker AI uses a trained model artifact
from Amazon S3 and an inference container from Amazon Elastic Container
Registry (ECR) with multiple, auto-scalable instances (Figure 6.3).
FIGURE 6.3 Real-time inference architecture.
Here is how real-time inference works at a high level.
Decompressing the model artifact. When you deploy a model for
real-time inference, the first step performed by Amazon SageMaker AI is
to decompress the model artifact. This artifact is a compressed file
(usually a tar.gz file) that contains the serialized model and any other
necessary files (such as learned parameters during training, configuration
files or scripts) that were output by the training job. As shown in Figure
6.3, Amazon SageMaker AI retrieves this artifact from the specified S3
bucket.
Serving the model. Next, the model is loaded and served by a
framework-specific container. Amazon SageMaker AI supports various
ML frameworks like TensorFlow, PyTorch, and many built-in algorithms,
as you learned in Chapter 4. The serving container includes the necessary
libraries to deserialize the model and make it ready for predictions.
Amazon SageMaker AI accesses your selected algorithm/framework’s
container image from Amazon ECR and uses this image to create a
container. The model is now running in a container runtime (Docker)
hosted on an instance (or multiple instances based on incoming traffic)
managed by Amazon SageMaker AI. In Figure 6.3, the model is
represented as an hexagon and is running and waiting to serve inference
requests.
Endpoint configuration. Amazon SageMaker AI creates an endpoint
configuration, which includes details such as the instance type (e.g.,
ml.m5.large), the instance count, and the model to be deployed. This
configuration allows Amazon SageMaker AI to manage the resources
required to serve the model and handle incoming requests. The endpoint
configuration can be customized based on the performance and
scalability requirements of your deployment. Figure 6.3 shows some of
the properties you can set when you create an endpoint configuration.
HTTPS endpoint. Once the endpoint configuration is ready, Amazon
SageMaker AI creates an HTTPS endpoint. This endpoint is a unique
URL that clients can use to send real-time inference requests to the
model. The endpoint uses HTTPS for secure communication, ensuring
that data sent between the client and the server is encrypted and secure.
Autoscaling and load balancing (optional).   For real-time inference,
you can optionally enable autoscaling to automatically adjust the number
of instances based on incoming traffic. Amazon SageMaker AI integrates
with AWS Application Auto Scaling, allowing the endpoint to elastically
scale in or out based on predefined policies or real-time metrics.
Application load balancing distributes incoming requests across all
available instances, ensuring efficient balancing of traffic.
Monitoring and logging. Amazon SageMaker AI provides monitoring
and logging capabilities to track the performance and health of the
endpoint. You can view metrics such as invocation count, latency, and
error rate in Amazon CloudWatch. Logs are captured and can be
reviewed to debug issues or analyze the performance of the model.
Invoking the endpoint. Clients can now make real-time predictions by
sending HTTPS POST requests to the endpoint. These requests include
the input data, and the response contains the model’s prediction. The
serving container processes the input data, runs it through the model, and
passes the response to the ML app, which returns the predictions to the
client.
Before delving into other managed model deployment types, the exam
requires you to know the different “flavors” of real-time inference
deployments available with Amazon SageMaker AI. These are multi-model
endpoints (MMEs) and multi-container endpoints (MCEs).
Multi-model Endpoints
MMEs offer an efficient and cost-effective solution for deploying multiple ML
models on a single endpoint. With MMEs, different models share the same
container image, optimizing resource usage and reducing the costs associated
with managing separate endpoints for each model. This setup is particularly
advantageous for scenarios where you have numerous models that are
infrequently used, as it allows you to dynamically load and unload models as
needed. By leveraging a shared serving infrastructure, MMEs simplify model
management while ensuring high performance, scalability, and reliability. This
architecture, as illustrated in Figure 6.4, showcases a single endpoint with a
shared container image, three models stored in Amazon S3, and efficient
handling of inference requests by dynamically loading the required model into
memory.
FIGURE 6.4 MME architecture.
However, MMEs do have their limitations. One key limitation is that all
models deployed on an MME must use the same container image, which
includes the same framework and runtime environment. This requirement can
be restrictive if you need to deploy models that rely on different frameworks
or dependencies. Additionally, although MMEs provide isolated memory
spaces for each model, the models still share the same container runtime,
which may lead to resource contention in high-demand scenarios. It’s
important to carefully manage the loading and unloading of models to ensure
optimal performance and avoid latency issues. Despite these limitations, MMS
remain a powerful and flexible solution for deploying multiple ML models
efficiently and cost-effectively. The architecture in Figure 6.4 highlights the
key components of this deployment, ensuring a seamless and scalable
inference experience.
Multi-container Endpoints
MCEs allow you to deploy containers with different frameworks, overcoming
the limitation of MMEs where all models must use the same container image.
As of the writing of this book, MCEs allow you to deploy up to 15 containers
on a single endpoint. The containers can be run in a sequence (serial
invocation) or individually (direct invocation). With direct invocation, each
container can be accessed independently to improve endpoint utilization and
optimize costs. By running multiple containers on the same EC2 instance,
MCEs streamline resource utilization and simplify the deployment of complex
inference pipelines.
The architecture in Figure 6.5 illustrates an MCE configured with direct
invocation. The figure shows how you would create an MCE model with the
CreateModel API.
The CreateModel API is a RESTful API that you can call directly to
create a model in Amazon SageMaker AI. You provide the necessary
information, such as the model name, container details, and execution role,
in a structured request format. To learn more, visit
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/APIReferen
ce/API_CreateModel.html.
Notice how we define a “polymorphic” model by specifying which form
(container) it can use. In our example, the model can be built from three
distinct container images: Container1, Contaner2, and Container3.
These could be, for example, the container image URIs for Scikit-Learn,
TensorFlow, and PyTorch. With a direct invocation mode the three models are
consumed by your ML app individually.
FIGURE 6.5 MCE architecture with container direct invocation.
When the client calls the ML app requesting inference, it can select one of the
three models by specifying which target container hostname to use. This
selection can be accomplished with the invoke_endpoint API from the
SageMaker Runtime client. For more details, visit
https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/re
ference/services/sagemaker-runtime.html.
Just like MMEs, your containers are hosted in the same EC2 instance,
resulting in potential resource contention. This can lead to performance issues
if the containers require substantial computational resources. Despite this
limitation, MCEs provide a powerful and versatile solution for deploying
sophisticated ML workflows, leveraging the modularity and flexibility of
containerization to enhance the scalability and efficiency of your inference
deployments.
For the exam, be aware of some of the most common MCE use cases,
including the following:
Hosting models across different frameworks
Hosting models from the same framework with different ML algorithms
A/B testing
If you need to deploy a complex ML workflow involving multiple models or
preprocessing steps, each potentially requiring different frameworks and
dependencies, then MCEs are a valid option to consider.
Serverless Inference
With serverless inference, you no longer have to guess how many instances
you need and what instance type are best suited for your ML models. Amazon
SageMaker AI serverless inference automatically provisions and scales the
necessary compute resources based on your model’s workload. Because
Amazon SageMaker AI manages your model endpoint’s infrastructure based
on inference demand, you are charged only for the instances used to respond
to inference requests. This flexibility ensures that your application can handle
varying amounts of traffic without the need for manual intervention, providing
a seamless and cost-effective solution for deploying ML models.
Figure 6.6 illustrates the serverless inference architecture.
FIGURE 6.6 Serverless Inference architecture.
The process begins by configuring the memory size and maximum
concurrency for your serverless endpoint. These parameters help Amazon
SageMaker AI allocate the appropriate compute resources to meet your ML
app’s performance requirements. When an inference request is made, Amazon
SageMaker AI dynamically scales the compute capacity to match the demand
(scale-out), ensuring that your model can handle bursts of traffic while
maintaining low latency. Conversely, when inference requests are completed,
this architecture reduces the compute resources (scale-in), deprovisioning the
excess capacity to minimize costs. This elastic compute behavior is
symbolized in Figure 6.6 with downward chevrons (scale-out) and upward
chevrons (scale-in). This serverless architecture eliminates the need to
preallocate resources, reducing costs when your model is idle or experiencing
low traffic.
Max concurrency refers to the maximum number of concurrent requests
that can be processed by your serverless endpoint at any given time. By
setting this parameter, you define the upper limit of simultaneous requests
the endpoint can handle, which helps manage traffic spikes and ensures
consistent performance. Provisioned concurrency, on the other hand,
ensures that a specified number of execution environments are always
ready to handle requests, reducing latency and providing a more
predictable response time.
Another advantage of serverless inference is its seamless integration with
Amazon SageMaker AI’s model deployment pipeline. Once your model is
trained and tuned, you can easily deploy it using the serverless inference
configuration. This involves specifying the model artifacts (such as
model.tar.gz) and the serving container image URI. Similarly to real-time
inference, Amazon SageMaker AI takes care of downloading and
decompressing the model files, initializing the model, and exposing an API
endpoint for inference requests. This automated process simplifies deployment
and ensures that your model is ready to serve predictions without manual
setup.
By leveraging a serverless infrastructure, you can focus on building and
optimizing your models rather than managing the underlying infrastructure.
Serverless inference is particularly suited for applications with variable or
unpredictable traffic patterns, enabling efficient resource utilization and cost
management.
At the end of the chapter, you will be walked through a deep-dive
demonstration of how serverless inference works with the Amazon SageMaker
Python SDK. Specifically, we will use an instance of the
ServerlessInferenceConfig class to programmatically create a
serverless endpoint exposing the best XGBoost model for the Digits dataset
we tuned at the end of Chapter 5.
To learn more about the ServerlessInferenceConfig class, visit
https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/inference/s
erverless.html#sagemaker.serverless.serverless_inference_c
onfig.ServerlessInferenceConfig.
Asynchronous Inference
Asynchronous inference is another managed model deployment designed to
handle large-scale, long-running tasks that do not require an immediate
response. Unlike real-time endpoints that process requests and return results
within a short timeframe, asynchronous inference allows you to submit
inference requests and process them at a later time. This means that requests
can be queued and processed as resources become available, making it ideal
for scenarios where inference latency is not a critical factor. Asynchronous
inference helps manage and balance your workload effectively, ensuring that
large volumes of data can be processed without overwhelming your
infrastructure.
The workflow for Amazon SageMaker AI asynchronous inference is
straightforward. You start by creating an asynchronous inference endpoint,
similar to a real-time endpoint, and then submit your inference requests to this
endpoint. Each request is stored in an Amazon S3 bucket, and Amazon
SageMaker AI retrieves the requests from the bucket for processing. Once the
inference is completed, the results are stored back in the Amazon S3 bucket,
and you can retrieve them at your convenience. You can optionally choose to
receive success or error notifications with Amazon SNS. This decoupled
architecture allows for efficient handling of large datasets and long-running
inference tasks without the constraints of real-time processing.
Asynchronous inference is best suited for use cases where inference tasks are
resource-intensive and time-consuming and can tolerate delayed responses.
Examples include processing large image datasets, running complex ML
models, and performing extensive data transformations.
Batch Inference
As the volume and payload of your inference requests increase, a well-
architected solution to generate inference at scale becomes essential. Amazon
SageMaker AI batch inference is designed to address this challenge by
allowing you to process large datasets in bulk. Unlike real-time endpoints,
which cater to immediate predictions, batch inference is tailored for scenarios
where low-latency responses are not a priority. By leveraging batch inference,
you can efficiently handle extensive workloads, ensuring that your ML models
can process significant amounts of data without compromising performance.
It’s important to highlight that batch transform jobs do not require endpoints;
instead, they operate by processing data in bulk and storing the results in
specified locations.
The process begins with creating a batch transform job, where you specify the
input data location, the model to be used, and the output data location.
Amazon SageMaker AI then processes the input data in parallel, utilizing its
scalable infrastructure to optimize resource usage. Once the batch transform
job is completed, the results are stored in the specified output location,
allowing you to retrieve and analyze them at your convenience. Similarly to
asynchronous inference, this decoupled architecture ensures that batch
inference tasks can be managed effectively, minimizing the need for
continuous monitoring and intervention.
Amazon SageMaker AI batch inference is particularly well-suited for use
cases where large volumes of data need to be processed simultaneously and
the immediacy of the model predictions is not critical. Examples include
offline analytics, data preprocessing, and periodic model updates. It is also
ideal for generating predictions for entire datasets, such as scoring customer
data for marketing campaigns or analyzing sensor data for predictive
maintenance.
Unmanaged Model Deployments
With AWS, you don’t have to deploy your models with Amazon SageMaker
AI. Although Amazon SageMaker AI offers a robust and fully managed
solution for model deployment, providing numerous benefits such as
automatic scaling, built-in algorithms, and simplified model training and
deployment processes, it may not always be the best fit for every scenario.
Unmanaged model deployments are referred to as a method where you, as the
user, take on the responsibility for managing all the deployment infrastructure.
This approach offers greater flexibility and control compared to fully managed
services like Amazon SageMaker AI, but it also involves the trade-off of
taking on the cost and complexity of managing the deployment infrastructure
yourself.
Unmanaged deployments grant you greater control and customization over
your environment, allowing for specific hardware configurations, custom
software dependencies, and specialized network settings. This level of
granularity is ideal for users who need to tailor their deployment setups
extensively. Additionally, unmanaged deployments can lead to cost
optimizations, as you have the flexibility to fine-tune instance types, utilize
spot instances, and manage scaling policies manually, potentially providing
significant cost savings. However, it is important to recognize that this control
comes with the responsibility of maintaining and managing the infrastructure,
which can introduce additional complexity and overhead.
Beyond control and cost, other factors such as complex workflows and
integration needs, data residency, compute residency requirements, and
compliance or regulatory considerations also drive the choice for unmanaged
deployments. For instance, when deploying models in environments with strict
data residency requirements or industry-specific regulations like GDPR and
HIPAA, having full control over the infrastructure ensures that you can
implement custom security measures and meet all necessary legal standards.
In such cases, AWS compute services like Amazon EC2, ECS, EKS, and
Lambda offer the flexibility and control needed to address these specific
demands for your model deployments.
In the upcoming sections, you will learn how each of these AWS compute
services can be used to deploy your ML models in AWS.
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
Amazon EC2 provides scalable compute capacity in the cloud, allowing users
to launch virtual servers and manage their own infrastructure. For unmanaged
model deployments, EC2 instances can be used to host ML models, providing
full control over the environment, including the operating system, network
configuration, and security settings. This flexibility is ideal for users who need
to customize their deployment setup extensively. By leveraging EC2, you can
choose the instance types that best fit your workload requirements, ensuring
optimal performance and cost efficiency.
When selecting EC2 instance types, it’s important to consider whether your
workload would benefit more from CPU or GPU resources.
CPUs are generally suitable for traditional ML workloads, data preprocessing,
and applications that do not require intensive parallel processing. They are
best suited for the early phases of the ML lifecycle, such as data cleaning,
feature engineering, and model inference tasks that do not demand heavy
computational power.
GPUs are highly efficient for deep learning tasks, image processing, and other
compute-intensive operations that can take advantage of parallel processing
capabilities. They are particularly beneficial during the training and evaluation
phases of the ML lifecycle, where large datasets and complex algorithms
require substantial computational resources to reduce training time and
improve model accuracy.
Whereas training a deep learning model often necessitates a high-powered
GPU instance due to the heavy computational load, performing inferences
(applying the trained model to new data) typically requires significantly
less processing power and can often be done on a less powerful GPU or
even a CPU, depending on the application and desired latency. As a result,
deploying these deep learning models on a full-sized GPU may lead to
underutilization and unnecessary costs.
Table 6.2 can help you select the appropriate EC2 instance types for different
ML inference tasks. Because the cost varies by region and other factors, the
provided figures are approximations. Keep in mind that although model
training typically demands high memory consumption due to the large datasets
processed during the learning phase, inference primarily focuses on achieving
high throughput and low latency, meaning quick responses to new data with
minimal delay.
For the exam, be aware of how AWS Inferentia EC2 instance types (Inf1,
Inf2) deliver high performance at the lowest cost for your deep learning
(DL) and generative AI inference applications. More advanced inference
capabilities on these compute architectures are enabled by the newly
developed AWS Neuron SDK, which integrates natively with popular
frameworks, such as PyTorch and TensorFlow, so that you can continue to
use your existing code and workflows and run on AWS Inferentia chips.
For more information, visit
https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/inf2.
TABLE 6.2
Inference-Based EC2 Instance Types.
Instance
type
Use case
Key
features
Approximate
cost
GPU-
based
Compute
architecture
t2 (burstable
performance)
Development,
testing, basic
inference
Low-cost,
burstable
CPU
performance
Low
No
x86–64 (64-
bit)
c5 (general
purpose)
Versatile ML
workloads,
basic
inference
Balanced
CPU,
memory,
and network
resources
Moderate
No
x86–64 (64-
bit)
m5 (general
purpose)
Mixed
workloads,
basic
inference
Balanced
CPU,
memory,
and network
resources
Moderate
No
x86–64 (64-
bit)
Inf1
(inferentia)
High-
performance,
cost-effective
inference
Powered by
AWS
Inferentia
chips
Moderate
No
AWS
Inferentia
Inf2
(inferentia)
High-
performance,
cost-effective
inference
Powered by
second-
generation
AWS
Inferentia
chips
Moderate
No
AWS
Inferentia
g4dn (GPU
optimized)
Deep learning
inference
NVIDIA
GPUs, cost-
effective
High
Yes
NVIDIA T4
Tensor Core
GPUs
g5 (GPU
optimized)
Deep learning
inference
Higher-
performance
NVIDIA
GPUs
High
Yes
NVIDIA
A10G
Tensor Core
GPUs
Instance
type
Use case
Key
features
Approximate
cost
GPU-
based
Compute
architecture
g6 (GPU
optimized)
Deep learning
inference
NVIDIA L4
Tensor Core
GPUs
High
Yes
NVIDIA L4
Tensor Core
GPUs
p4 (compute
optimized)
High-
performance
inference
Higher-
performance
NVIDIA
GPUs
Highest
Yes
NVIDIA
A100 Tensor
Core GPUs
p5 (compute
optimized)
High-
performance
inference
Higher-
performance
NVIDIA
GPUs
Highest
Yes
NVIDIA
H100 Tensor
Core GPUs
Trn1
High-
performance
AI training
and inference
(LLMs and
generative AI)
Powered by
AWS
Trainium
chips
Highest
No
AWS
Trainium
Trn2
High-
performance
AI training
and inference
(LLMs and
generative AI)
Powered by
AWS
Trainium2
chips
Highest
No
AWS
Trainium2
Amazon Elastic Container Service
Amazon ECS is another powerful option for unmanaged model deployments.
Amazon ECS allows you to run and manage containerized applications,
making it well-suited for deploying ML models in a flexible and scalable
manner. With Amazon ECS, you can define and manage your containerized
model deployment using task definitions, which specify the necessary Docker
container images, resources, and networking settings. One of the key
advantages of using Amazon ECS for unmanaged model deployment is the
ability to utilize both EC2 and AWS Fargate launch types. The EC2 launch
type allows for granular control over the underlying infrastructure, enabling
you to optimize performance and cost by selecting specific instance types. On
the other hand, the AWS Fargate launch type abstracts away the infrastructure
management, providing a serverless experience where you focus only on
running your containerized models. This flexibility makes Amazon ECS an
attractive choice for a variety of deployment scenarios.
In addition to flexibility, Amazon ECS offers robust integration with other
AWS services, enhancing the overall deployment experience. For instance,
Amazon ECS integrates seamlessly with Amazon CloudWatch for monitoring
container performance, AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) for
security and access control, and Amazon EFS for persistent storage. By
leveraging these integrations, you can build a comprehensive deployment
pipeline that includes logging, monitoring, and scaling. Furthermore, Amazon
ECS provides support for service discovery, allowing your containerized
applications to easily communicate with each other within the same network.
This feature is particularly useful for microservices architectures where
different components of your ML application need to interact seamlessly.
Overall, Amazon ECS offers a powerful, flexible, and integrated platform for
unmanaged model deployments, enabling you to efficiently run and manage
your ML models at scale.
Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service
Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) leverages the power of
Kubernetes, a leading open-source container orchestration platform, for
unmanaged model deployments. By utilizing Amazon EKS, you can
efficiently deploy, manage, and scale containerized ML models with
Kubernetes-native tools and APIs. Amazon EKS automates critical aspects of
setting up and maintaining a Kubernetes control plane, providing high
availability, security, and performance, which allows you to concentrate on
running your ML workloads. Additionally, Amazon EKS integrates
seamlessly with other AWS services, such as Amazon S3 for data storage,
AWS IAM for secure access control, and Amazon CloudWatch for monitoring
and logging.
Moreover, Amazon EKS offers unparalleled flexibility and control, allowing
you to leverage Kubernetes’ full capabilities for your ML deployments. With
support for Kubernetes add-ons and third-party tools, you can enhance your
deployment environment with advanced features like service meshes, logging,
and monitoring solutions. Amazon EKS enables you to take advantage of
essential Kubernetes features such as autoscaling, rolling updates, and self-
healing, ensuring that your models are running optimally at all times. This
flexibility is beneficial for organizations with existing Kubernetes
infrastructure or expertise, as it provides a consistent deployment experience
whether operating on-premises or in the cloud. Overall, Amazon EKS delivers
a robust and scalable platform for deploying and managing ML models,
making it another valuable choice for organizations looking to harness the full
potential of Kubernetes.
AWS Lambda
AWS Lambda offers a serverless computing model that is well-suited for
deploying ML models, especially when you need to run inference at scale
without managing the underlying infrastructure. With AWS Lambda, you can
package your ML model as a Lambda function and deploy it to automatically
scale in response to incoming requests. This pay-as-you-go model ensures that
you pay only for the compute time consumed by your model, making it a cost-
effective solution for running inference tasks. Lambda functions can be
triggered by various AWS services such as API Gateway, S3, or DynamoDB,
allowing you to build a seamless and integrated deployment pipeline for your
ML applications.
One of the significant advantages of using AWS Lambda for unmanaged
model deployment is its ability to handle highly variable workloads with ease.
Lambda automatically scales up and down based on the number of requests,
ensuring that your model can handle sudden spikes in demand without manual
intervention. This is particularly beneficial for applications with unpredictable
traffic patterns or seasonal variations. Additionally, Lambda’s integration with
Amazon CloudWatch provides robust monitoring and logging capabilities,
enabling you to track the performance and health of your deployed models.
You can set up alarms and notifications to stay informed about any issues or
anomalies, ensuring that your models are always running optimally.
Finally, AWS Lambda supports a variety of programming languages,
including Python, which is widely used for ML. This flexibility allows you to
use familiar tools and frameworks to develop and deploy your models. You
can also leverage AWS Lambda Layers to manage dependencies and share
common code across multiple functions, simplifying the deployment process.
Lambda’s stateless nature means that each invocation of the function is
independent, ensuring consistent performance and reliability. By combining
AWS Lambda with other AWS services like S3 for model storage and API
Gateway for creating RESTful APIs, you can build a scalable, cost-effective,
and fully managed deployment solution for your ML models.
Optimizing ML Models for Edge Devices
Optimizing ML models for edge devices involves several strategies to ensure
efficient performance and resource utilization. Amazon SageMaker Neo is a
powerful service designed specifically for this purpose, enabling developers to
optimize and deploy ML models on various edge devices with ease. Amazon
SageMaker Neo compiles and tunes models to run efficiently on specific
hardware and software configurations, making it ideal for edge deployment.
With Amazon SageMaker Neo, you can optimize models for a wide range of
edge devices, including those powered by ARM, Intel, Nvidia, and other
processors. This service supports popular frameworks such as TensorFlow,
TensorFlow-Lite, PyTorch, and the Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX)
standard format, providing flexibility and compatibility with different
development workflows. Amazon SageMaker Neo automatically applies
techniques like quantization, compression, and pruning to reduce the size and
complexity of ML models, ensuring that they run efficiently on resource-
constrained devices.
The process begins by training your ML model (in the cloud using Amazon
SageMaker or somewhere else). Once the model is trained, you can use
Amazon SageMaker Neo to compile and optimize it for your target edge
device. Amazon SageMaker Neo creates a binary file that is highly optimized
for the target hardware, allowing for faster and more efficient inference. This
approach not only reduces latency but also conserves energy, making it
suitable for low-power edge devices.
To continuously monitor and update ML models deployed on edge devices,
Amazon SageMaker Neo provides tools for over-the-air (OTA) updates. This
ensures that models remain up to date and maintain high accuracy over time
without requiring physical access to the devices. With Amazon SageMaker
Neo you can create responsive, secure, and robust AI applications that deliver
exceptional user experiences on edge devices.
You can see the list of supported edge devices, cloud instances, and
framework versions by visiting
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/neo-
supported-devices-edge.html.
The following snippet shows an example of exporting a pretrained
TensorFlow model, uploading it to S3, and creating an Amazon SageMaker
Neo compilation job to optimize it for an iPhone using Apple Core ML:
import tensorflow as tf
import boto3
from sagemaker import get_execution_role, Session
           
# Step 1: Export the Pre-trained Model
# Load your pre-trained model
model = 
tf.keras.models.load_model('path_to_your_model.h5')
       
# Save the model in the SavedModel format
model.save('saved_model_path')
       
# Step 2: Upload the Model to S3
s3 = boto3.client('s3')
s3.upload_file('saved_model_path', 'your-bucket', 
'saved_model_path')
       
# Step 3: Create a SageMaker Neo Compilation Job
# Initialize SageMaker session
sagemaker_session = Session()
       
# Get the execution role
role = get_execution_role()
       
# Define the S3 bucket paths
input_model_path = 's3://your-bucket/saved_model_path'
output_model_path = 's3://your-bucket/compiled-model'
       
# Create a Neo compilation job
sagemaker_client = boto3.client('sagemaker')
       
response = sagemaker_client.create_compilation_job(
    CompilationJobName='MyCompilationJob',
    RoleArn=role,
    InputConfig={
        'S3Uri': input_model_path,
        'DataInputConfig': '{"input": [1, 224, 224, 3]}',
        'Framework': 'TENSORFLOW'
    },
    OutputConfig={
        'S3OutputLocation': output_model_path,
        'TargetDevice': 'ml_coreml'  # Target device for 
iPhone
    },
    StoppingCondition={
        'MaxRuntimeInSeconds': 3600
    }
)
       
# Wait for the compilation job to complete
sagemaker_client.get_waiter('compilation_job_completed_or_
stopped').wait(
    CompilationJobName='MyCompilationJob'
)
       
# Check the status of the compilation job
status = sagemaker_client.describe_compilation_job(
    CompilationJobName='MyCompilationJob'
)['CompilationJobStatus']
print(f'Compilation job status: {status}')
Advanced Model Deployment Techniques
Amazon SageMaker AI offers advanced deployment techniques to ensure that
your ML models perform optimally and reliably in production. With Amazon
Application Auto Scaling, you can automatically scale your SageMaker
endpoints based on predefined metrics, ensuring efficient resource utilization
and cost management during variable traffic loads. Deployment strategies such
as Blue/Green deployments and testing strategies like canary, shadow, and
A/B testing allow for seamless and reliable transitions to new model versions
with minimal disruption. These techniques will be described in the following
sections, providing a comprehensive framework for deploying ML models
effectively using Amazon SageMaker AI.
Autoscaling Endpoints
Autoscaling Amazon SageMaker AI endpoints ensures that your deployed ML
models can handle varying levels of traffic efficiently by scaling horizontally
(scale-in, scale-out) the instances responsible for serving incoming inference
requests. Amazon Application Auto Scaling allows you to automatically
adjust the number of instance replicas for your Amazon SageMaker AI
endpoints based on predefined metrics, such as CPU utilization or request
count. This helps in maintaining optimal performance while keeping costs
under control. To begin with, you need to configure your endpoint with an
autoscaling policy using the application-autoscaling boto3 client.
First, let’s create an autoscaling policy for a real-time endpoint. To do so, you
need to define two components:
A scaling target: Sets the boundaries for scaling (e.g., minimum 1
instance, maximum 10 instances)
A scaling policy: Specifies the metric to monitor (e.g.,
SageMakerVariantInvocationsPerInstance or
CPUUtilization), the target value for this metric, and the conditions
under which to scale in or out
Here’s a simple example in Python to illustrate this:
import boto3
      
client = boto3.client('application-autoscaling')
      
# Register a scalable target
response = client.register_scalable_target(
    ServiceNamespace='sagemaker',
    ResourceId='endpoint/your-endpoint-
name/variant/AllTraffic',
 
   ScalableDimension='sagemaker:variant:DesiredInstanceCou
nt',
    MinCapacity=1,
    MaxCapacity=10
)
      
# Create a scaling policy
response = client.put_scaling_policy(
    PolicyName='ScalingPolicy',
    ServiceNamespace='sagemaker',
    ResourceId='endpoint/your-endpoint-
name/variant/AllTraffic',
 
   ScalableDimension='sagemaker:variant:DesiredInstanceCou
nt',
    PolicyType='TargetTrackingScaling',
    TargetTrackingScalingPolicyConfiguration={
        'TargetValue': 70.0,  # Target number of endpoint 
invocations per instance
          'PredefinedMetricSpecification': {
            'PredefinedMetricType': 
'SageMakerVariantInvocationsPerInstance',
        },
        'ScaleInCooldown': 300,
        'ScaleOutCooldown': 300
    }
)
In this example, autoscaling is triggered based on the number of invocations
(requests) per instance for your Amazon SageMaker AI endpoint. Specifically,
the scaling policy is set to maintain an average of 70 invocations per instance.
If the average number of invocations per instance goes above 70, the policy
will automatically add more instances (scale out) to handle the increased load.
Conversely, if the average number of invocations per instance drops below 70,
the policy will reduce the number of instances (scale in) to optimize resource
usage. This “elastic” behavior ensures that your real-time inference endpoint
can dynamically adapt to changing traffic levels, maintaining performance and
efficiency.
The ScaleInCooldown and ScaleOutCooldown parameters define the cool
down period in seconds for scaling in and scaling out actions, respectively. In
this case, both are set to 300 seconds (5 minutes). When a scaling action is
triggered, such as adding more instances (scaling out) or reducing instances
(scaling in), the cooldown period ensures that no further scaling actions of the
same type can be taken until the cooldown period has elapsed. This helps
prevent rapid and excessive scaling actions in response to short-term
fluctuations in traffic, ensuring that the system has sufficient time to stabilize
before considering another scaling adjustment.
Let’s look at another example where we scale based on CPU utilization. We
can modify the scaling policy to use a custom metric, such as average CPU
utilization. Here’s how you can achieve this:
import boto3
        
client = boto3.client('application-autoscaling')
      
# Register a scalable target
response = client.register_scalable_target(
    ServiceNamespace='sagemaker',
    ResourceId='endpoint/your-endpoint-
name/variant/AllTraffic',
 
   ScalableDimension='sagemaker:variant:DesiredInstanceCou
nt',
    MinCapacity=1,
    MaxCapacity=10
)
      
# Create a scaling policy
response = client.put_scaling_policy(
    PolicyName='CPUScalingPolicy',
    ServiceNamespace='sagemaker',
    ResourceId='endpoint/your-endpoint-
name/variant/AllTraffic',
 
   ScalableDimension='sagemaker:variant:DesiredInstanceCou
nt',
    PolicyType='TargetTrackingScaling',
    TargetTrackingScalingPolicyConfiguration={
        'TargetValue': 50.0,  # Target average CPU 
utilization
        'CustomizedMetricSpecification': {
            'MetricName': 'CPUUtilization',
            'Namespace': 'AWS/SageMaker',
            'Dimensions': [{'Name': 'EndpointName', 
'Value': 'your-endpoint-name'}],
            'Statistic': 'Average',
            'Unit': 'Percent'
        },
        'ScaleInCooldown': 300,
        'ScaleOutCooldown': 300
    }
)
In this second example, autoscaling is triggered based on the average CPU
utilization of the instances running the Amazon SageMaker AI endpoint. The
scaling policy is set to maintain an average CPU utilization of 50%. If the
average CPU usage across the instances exceeds 50%, the policy will
automatically add more instances (scale out) to handle the increased load.
Conversely, if the average CPU usage drops below 50%, the policy will
reduce the number of instances (scale in) to optimize resource usage. The
cooldown periods ensure that these scaling actions are not triggered too
frequently, allowing the system to stabilize before making further adjustments.
These two programs demonstrate the use of Amazon Application Auto Scaling
—Target Tracking autoscaling, specifically—to “elastically” adjust the
number of instances for your Amazon SageMaker AI endpoints, ensuring
optimal performance, reliability, and cost efficiency.
For the exam, be aware of other types of autoscaling, such as step scaling
and scheduled scaling. Step scaling adjusts the number of instances
(resources) based on predefined steps that you define in response to a
target threshold triggering event (e.g., the lower bound, the upper bound
and the amount by which to scale). Scheduled scaling adjusts the number
of instances (resources) based on a set schedule.
Amazon Application Auto Scaling is fully supported by MMEs and MCEs. In
the latter use case (MCEs), use caution. If you want to configure automatic
scaling for an MCE using the InvocationsPerInstance metric, make sure
the model in each container exhibits similar CPU utilization and latency on
each inference request. This is best practice because if traffic to the MCE
shifts from a low-CPU-utilization model to a high-CPU-utilization model, but
the overall volume of invocations remains the same, the endpoint will not
scale out. This will result in an insufficient number of instances to handle all
the requests to the high CPU utilization model.
Notice how both examples denote the real-time inference endpoint with the
ResourceId variable, whose value is set to endpoint/your-endpoint-
name/variant/AllTraffic. The term variant refers to different versions
or configurations of the model deployed to the same Amazon SageMaker
endpoint. This concept allows for multiple variants within the same endpoint,
each potentially having different instance types, counts, or even different
model versions. By specifying the suffix variant/AllTraffic, we apply
the autoscaling policy to all the traffic directed to the endpoint. You can also
define specific named variants (e.g., variant/VersionA), enabling you to
manage and scale different model versions independently. This flexibility is
especially useful for tasks such as Blue/Green deployments, shadow testing, or
canary testing when deploying new model updates, which will be discussed in
the next section.
Deployment and Testing Strategies
A key aspect of any deployment strategy is to minimize downtime to the
consumers of your models (or applications). To avoid disrupting service for
users while updating to a new, or an improved, model, you can take advantage
of Amazon SageMaker AI’s production variants feature.
This feature comes really handy if you consider how frequently a ML model
gets updated and continuously evaluated for performance. A new version of a
model may be created as a result of training on more recent data,
hyperparameter tuning (with Amazon SageMaker AI AMT, for example),
improving feature selection, or using better instances and inference containers.
You can leverage production variants to compare your models and choose the
best-performing candidate to respond to inference requests.
With Amazon SageMaker AI multivariant endpoints, you can distribute
endpoint invocation requests across multiple production variants by providing
the traffic distribution for each variant, or you can invoke a specific variant
directly for each request. In this section, we look at these methods for
deploying and testing ML models.
Blue/Green Deployment
Blue/Green deployment is a strategy that reduces the risk and downtime
associated with deploying new versions of a model. In Amazon SageMaker
AI, this approach can be effectively implemented by leveraging the production
variant concept you just learned, which allows seamless traffic shifting
between different model versions or configurations. By carefully controlling
the traffic flow, you can ensure that users experience minimal disruption while
you validate the performance and stability of the new model version.
Before going into more details, let’s level set on a few terms you need to know
for the exam and constitute the basis of this strategy. In the Blue/Green
deployment strategy, the blue fleet refers to the compute infrastructure where
the existing model version is serving live traffic. The green fleet, on the other
hand, is the compute infrastructure that hosts the new model version you want
to deploy. The goal is to shift traffic from the blue fleet to the green fleet in a
controlled manner, ensuring that the new model performs well under real-
world conditions before fully replacing the old one. By using this approach,
you can minimize downtime and mitigate the risk of introducing issues with
the new deployment.
Before fully transitioning to the new model, the new model version undergoes
rigorous testing and validation to ensure its performance and reliability.
During this interval—referred to as the baking period—the new model
(deployed on the green fleet) is monitored while serving live traffic. This will
ensure that it performs as expected, in accordance to performance metrics you
established. Once the green fleet starts receiving live traffic, the baking period
begins. To accomplish this, CloudWatch alarms must be properly configured
to continuously monitor key performance metrics and the behavior of the new
model. The baking period allows you to detect any issues early and address
them before directing more traffic to the new model. This additional validation
step is essential to maintaining service quality and minimizing the risk of
disruptions.
The term traffic shifting mode denotes the pattern of ingress traffic you want
your Amazon SageMaker AI endpoint to use while distributing inference
requests between the blue fleet and the green fleet.
Last, auto-rollbacks indicate the Amazon CloudWatch alarms Amazon
SageMaker AI uses to monitor how the new version of your model performs
on the (containers hosted on the) green fleet.
Remember, Amazon CloudWatch alarms are required to implement the
Blue/Green deployment strategy.
In the next three sections, the three traffic-shifting modes you need to know
for the exam are explained: namely, All At Once, Canary, and Linear.
All at Once
When implementing All At Once traffic shifting, Amazon SageMaker AI
directs 100% of the traffic to the new fleet (green fleet). As soon as the green
fleet starts serving traffic, the baking period begins. This period is a
predetermined interval during which Amazon CloudWatch alarms monitor the
green fleet’s performance. If no alarms are triggered during this time, Amazon
SageMaker AI removes the old fleet (blue fleet). However, if any alarms are
activated, an automatic rollback is initiated, redirecting 100% of the traffic
back to the blue fleet.
Figure 6.7 illustrates the All At Once traffic-shifting mode.
FIGURE 6.7 Blue/Green deployment with All At Once traffic-shifting
mode.
In Figure 6.7, we want to deploy a new version of our model named
Model_v2. In the beginning the current version of the model, Model_v1, is
serving live production traffic. Ingress traffic is initiated by an Amazon
SageMaker AI client, which uses the invoke_endpoint boto3 API to get
inferences from Model_v1 hosted in the blue fleet. To learn more about this
API, visit
https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/1.35.9/re
ference/services/sagemaker-
runtime/client/invoke_endpoint.html.
As you can see in Figure 6.7, the endpoint has a configuration that contains
two production variants, the first one for Model_v1 and the second one for
Model_v2. This is the Blue/Green Create step in the process.
Then we change the traffic pattern by redirecting all live traffic to Model_v2.
This is when the baking period begins. To implement this step, we use the
update_endpoint boto3 API with the following snippet:
import boto3
client = boto3.client("sagemaker")
         
response = client.update_endpoint(
    EndpointName="<your-endpoint-name>",
    EndpointConfigName="<your-config-name>",
    DeploymentConfig={
        "BlueGreenUpdatePolicy": {
            "TrafficRoutingConfiguration": {
                "Type": "ALL_AT_ONCE"
            },
            "TerminationWaitInSeconds": 600,
            "MaximumExecutionTimeoutInSeconds": 1800
        },
        "AutoRollbackConfiguration": {
            "Alarms": [
                {
                    "AlarmName": "<your-cw-alarm>"
                },
            ]
        }
    }
)
In the snippet, the parameter MaximumExecutionTimeoutInSeconds sets
the maximum amount of time that the deployment can run before it times out
(30 minutes in this example). The parameter TerminationWaitInSeconds
tells Amazon SageMaker AI to wait for the specified amount of time (in
seconds) after your green fleet is fully active before terminating the instances
in the blue fleet. In this example, Amazon SageMaker AI waits for 10 minutes
after the final baking period before terminating the blue fleet.
For a detailed syntax of the update_endpoint API call, visit
https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/re
ference/services/sagemaker/client/update_endpoint.html.
The effect of the update_endpoint API call is the new endpoint
configuration shown in the middle of Figure 6.7.
In the best-case scenario, no alarms are triggered during the baking period,
resulting in a termination of the blue fleet. Otherwise, an auto-rollback
initiates, and 100% of the traffic shifts back to the blue fleet.
Canary
In a Canary deployment with Amazon SageMaker AI, the traffic shifting is
more gradual compared to the All At Once approach. Initially, a small portion
of the traffic deemed feasible is directed to the new fleet (green fleet), and the
majority continues to be directed to the old fleet (blue fleet). This initial phase
is called the “canary test.” If the new fleet performs well during the canary test
without triggering any Amazon CloudWatch alarms, traffic is gradually
increased to the new fleet in additional steps until it reaches 100%. This
method allows for closer monitoring of the new version in a production
environment and reduces the risk of introducing issues by catching potential
problems early with a smaller subset of users.
The approach to implement a Canary deployment programmatically is similar
to the All At Once, as shown in the following snippet:
import boto3
client = boto3.client("sagemaker")
          
response = client.update_endpoint(
    EndpointName="<your-endpoint-name>",
    EndpointConfigName="<your-config-name>",
    DeploymentConfig={
        "BlueGreenUpdatePolicy": {
            "TrafficRoutingConfiguration": {
                "Type": "CANARY",
                "CanarySize": {
                    "Type": "CAPACITY_PERCENT",
                    "Value": 30
                },
                "WaitIntervalInSeconds": 600
            },
            "TerminationWaitInSeconds": 600,
            "MaximumExecutionTimeoutInSeconds": 1800
        },
        "AutoRollbackConfiguration": {
            "Alarms": [
                {
                    "AlarmName": "<your-cw-alarm>"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
)
The update_endpoint API allows you to set the Type parameter of the
TrafficRoutingConfiguration dictionary to the value CANARY. The
Value parameter of the CanarySize dictionary sets the percentage of your
green fleet you want to use as the canary. In the example, we configured the
endpoint to shift 30% of the ingress traffic to the green fleet. We could have
chosen to direct traffic to the green fleet based on INSTANCE_COUNT instead
of CAPACITY_PERCENT, which is another valid option for Type.
The canary size should be equal to or less than 50% of the green fleet’s
capacity.
The WaitIntervalInSeconds parameter denotes the duration (in seconds)
of the canary baking period. In the preceding example, Amazon SageMaker
AI waits for 10 minutes after the canary shift and then completes the second
and final traffic shift.
When comparing Canary with All At Once, it is important to remember that
the All At Once approach shifts 100% of the traffic to the green fleet in a
single step as soon as the deployment starts. Although this method is faster, it
carries higher risk because any undetected issues in the new fleet can affect all
users immediately. All At Once relies heavily on extensive predeployment
testing and a robust rollback plan, as the entire user base is exposed to the new
version immediately.
As a result, the key difference between the two approaches lies in the risk
management and traffic transition speed. Canary deployments provide a safer,
more controlled rollout by gradually increasing traffic and monitoring each
phase for stability, whereas All At Once deployments prioritize speed and
immediate transition but come with higher risks. Choosing between these
methods depends on your application’s tolerance for risk and the criticality of
ensuring seamless, uninterrupted user experience.
Linear
The linear Blue/Green deployment option provides the most granular control
over traffic shifting. Instead of deploying your green fleet in one step (All At
Once) or in two steps (Canary), linear traffic shifting gradually directs traffic
from the blue fleet to the green fleet in small, equal increments over a
specified period.
Just like Canary traffic shifting, you can choose the increment size by
specifying the number of instances or the percentage (10–50%) of the green
fleet’s capacity to activate during each phase.
For each phase of the deployment, you define a baking period where your
preconfigured Amazon CloudWatch alarms monitor the green fleet’s metrics.
If the baking period concludes without any alarms being triggered, the green
fleet continues to receive a greater share of traffic as the process moves to the
next phase. Should any alarms go off during any of these baking periods, all
the endpoint traffic will immediately revert to the blue fleet.
The following example shows how to implement the linear traffic-shifting
pattern using the update_endpoint API:
import boto3
client = boto3.client("sagemaker")
      
response = client.update_endpoint(
    EndpointName="<your-endpoint-name>",
    EndpointConfigName="<your-config-name>",
    DeploymentConfig={
        "BlueGreenUpdatePolicy": {
            "TrafficRoutingConfiguration": {
                "Type": "LINEAR",
                "LinearStepSize": {
                    "Type": "CAPACITY_PERCENT",
                    "Value": 20
                },
                "WaitIntervalInSeconds": 300
            },
            "TerminationWaitInSeconds": 300,
            "MaximumExecutionTimeoutInSeconds": 3600
        },
        "AutoRollbackConfiguration": {
            "Alarms": [
                {
                    "AlarmName": "<your-cw-alarm>"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
)
The approach is similar to the Canary deployment. The
TrafficRoutingConfiguration dictionary allows you to set a Type
parameter with a value LINEAR and a corresponding configuration
LinearStepSize where you can specify how to incrementally route more
traffic to the green fleet. In our example, at each step we will direct live traffic
to the green fleet in 20% increments (the parameter CAPACITY_PERCENT is
set to 20). INSTANCE_COUNT can also be used as an alternative way to direct
traffic to the green fleet. With linear traffic-shifting mode, as the name
suggests, the amount of inference traffic routed to the green fleet increases in a
linear fashion.
Notice how we also define a baking period for each step by assigning the
value 300 to the WaitIntervalInSeconds parameter. In the example,
Amazon SageMaker AI waits for 5 minutes between each traffic shift. If no
alarms are triggered within 5 minutes, Amazon SageMaker directs 20% more
traffic to the green fleet until 100% of traffic is sent to the new model. Upon
completion—assuming no alarms are triggered—Amazon SageMaker AI
waits for another 5 minutes (TerminationWaitInSeconds is set to 300) and
finally terminates all the instances in the blue fleet. If an alarm is triggered in
any of the five steps (0–20, 20–40, 40–60, 60–80, 80–100), Amazon
SageMaker AI rolls back 100% of the endpoint traffic to the blue fleet.
The linear deployment offers the highest level of risk reduction during your
model deployment process at the expense of potentially longer deployment
times. This approach is perfect for critical deployments where stability and
minimizing risk are essential, ensuring a smooth transition with ongoing
monitoring and the ability to roll back if any issues arise.
Orchestrating ML Workflows
You have learned so far how to ingest the data to train your ML models;
engineer the relevant features; choose a suitable algorithm; train, refine, and
optimize your model; and finally deploy it. These foundational steps are
crucial in the ML lifecycle and set the stage for building robust and efficient
models that can drive impactful insights and decisions.
However, orchestrating these steps manually can be time-consuming and
prone to errors. This is where Amazon SageMaker AI’s comprehensive suite
of tools comes into play, providing an integrated environment to streamline
and automate the entire ML workflow. By leveraging Amazon SageMaker AI,
you can seamlessly manage data preprocessing tasks, engineer your features,
and train, evaluate and deploy your model, all within a cohesive platform that
enhances productivity and reduces complexity.
One of the standout features in this ecosystem is Amazon SageMaker
Pipelines. This powerful tool enables the design, deployment, and
management of end-to-end ML workflows with ease. Amazon SageMaker
Pipelines comes with its own SDK, allowing you to define and visualize your
workflows programmatically, ensuring consistency and repeatability, which
are both key characteristics of modern ML operations.
In the upcoming sections you will learn Amazon SageMaker Pipelines’ main
capabilities you need to know for the exam.
Introducing Amazon SageMaker Pipelines
In the rapidly evolving world of ML, operationalizing ML models—often
referred to as MLOps—has become a cornerstone of successful AI-driven
projects. MLOps bridges the gap between ML model development and
production, ensuring seamless integration, deployment, monitoring, and
maintenance of models.
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines is a powerful tool that embodies the principles
of MLOps, enabling data scientists and ML engineers to automate and
orchestrate their workflows efficiently. The term orchestration refers to the
automation and management of the end-to-end ML lifecycle. Amazon
SageMaker Pipelines serves as a core tool in this orchestration process by
offering a structured framework to define, schedule, and monitor ML
workflows. This systematic approach ensures reliability and reduces the time
to market for your ML models.
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines offers several key advantages over other AWS
workflow solutions.
First, your ML pipelines operate on autoscaling serverless infrastructure. With
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines there’s no need to manage the underlying
orchestration infrastructure. This allows you to concentrate on core ML tasks.
Amazon SageMaker AI automatically provisions, scales, and shuts down the
pipeline orchestration compute resources according to your ML workload
demands.
Second, your ML pipelines can be created and managed through your
preferred interface: visual editor, SDK, APIs, or JSON. You can easily drag
and drop the various ML steps to design your pipelines using the Amazon
SageMaker Studio visual interface.
To learn how to use the Amazon SageMaker Pipeline Python SDK, visit
https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/workflows/pi
pelines/index.html.
Last, your ML pipelines can be seamlessly integrated with all Amazon
SageMaker AI features and other AWS services to automate data processing,
model training, fine-tuning, evaluation, deployment, and monitoring jobs.
Because they operate in a serverless environment, you only pay for your
SageMaker Studio instance and the underlying jobs that are orchestrated by
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines.
Before seeing Amazon SageMaker Pipelines in action, let’s level set on a few
constructs that are key to MLOps: namely, code repository, continuous
integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD), and Orchestration.
Code Repository and Version Control
A code repository, often referred to simply as a repo, is a storage location for
software code and related files. It’s a central place where developers can store,
share, and manage their codebase. Code repositories can be hosted on
platforms like GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket, which provide tools and
services to facilitate collaborative development. These platforms enable
multiple developers to work on the same codebase concurrently, track
changes, and contribute to the project seamlessly. In the context of ML with
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines, a code repository plays a crucial role in
organizing scripts, notebooks, and other artifacts required for building,
training, and deploying models. It ensures that all team members have access
to different versions of the code, fostering collaboration and maintaining
consistency across the development process.
Version control, on the other hand, is a system that tracks changes to files over
time. It allows developers to manage multiple versions of code, collaborate
effectively, and maintain a history of changes. Git is one of the most widely
used version control systems, and it operates by creating snapshots of the code
at various points in time, known as commits. Each commit records a set of
changes made to the codebase, along with metadata such as the author’s
information and a timestamp. Version control systems enable developers to
revert to previous versions of the code, compare changes between different
commits, and merge contributions from multiple team members. In the context
of Amazon SageMaker Pipelines, version control is essential for managing the
iterative nature of ML development. It ensures that any modifications to data
preprocessing scripts, model training code, or deployment configurations are
tracked and can be reviewed or rolled back if necessary. This level of control
enhances collaboration, improves the reliability of the pipeline, and ensures
that the ML workflow remains repeatable and transparent.
Introducing Amazon SageMaker Model Registry
Because a model artifact is the result of training and fine-tuning ML
algorithms on data, it’s critical to manage and track these artifacts effectively
throughout their lifecycle. Amazon SageMaker Model Registry is a fully
managed service that helps you catalog, organize, and manage your ML
models. It allows you to keep track of different versions of a model, from
initial development through production deployment. Amazon SageMaker
Model Registry provides a centralized repository to store and manage models,
enabling you to track metadata, performance metrics, and the history of each
model version. This is particularly useful in collaborative environments where
multiple data scientists and ML engineers work on the same project. Amazon
SageMaker Model Registry ensures that everyone has access to the latest
versions of the models, and it supports governance and compliance by
providing an audit trail of changes and deployments.
Using Amazon SageMaker Model Registry, you can automate the process of
registering, tracking, and deploying models. It integrates seamlessly with
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines, making it easier to automate model versioning
and lifecycle management within your ML workflows. By incorporating the
Model Registry into your Amazon SageMaker Pipelines, you can ensure that
your models are version-controlled, repeatable, and easily retrievable for
future use. This improves the efficiency and reliability of your MLOps,
allowing you to focus on building and deploying high-quality models.
CI/CD
A CI/CD pipeline is a crucial component of modern software development
practices, enabling teams to automate the process of integrating code changes,
building applications, running tests, and deploying to production
environments. AWS offers a suite of services to support CI/CD workflows,
ensuring seamless and efficient software delivery. AWS CodeArtifact is a fully
managed artifact repository service that makes it easy for organizations to
securely store, publish, and share software packages. AWS CodeBuild is a
fully managed build service that compiles source code, runs tests, and
produces software packages that are ready for deployment. AWS CodeDeploy
automates the deployment of applications to a variety of compute services
such as Amazon EC2, AWS Lambda, and on-premises servers. Finally, AWS
CodePipeline is a continuous integration and continuous delivery service for
fast and reliable application updates, enabling you to model, visualize, and
automate the steps required to release your software.
Because modern infrastructure is virtualized, managing and provisioning
computing resources through manual processes becomes impractical and
prone to errors. This is where infrastructure as code (IaC) comes into play,
allowing you to define and manage your infrastructure using machine-readable
configuration files in a declarative manner. AWS CloudFormation and
Terraform are two popular IaC tools that enable you to automate the setup and
management of your infrastructure. AWS CloudFormation provides a common
language for you to describe and provision all the infrastructure resources in
your cloud environment. Using AWS CloudFormation, you can use a simple
text file (in JSON or YAML format) to model and provision, in an automated
and secure manner, all the resources needed for your applications across all
regions and accounts. Terraform, developed by HashiCorp, is an open-source
IaC tool that allows you to build, change, and version infrastructure safely and
efficiently. It provides a consistent CLI workflow to manage hundreds of
cloud services. Both tools ensure that your infrastructure setup is repeatable,
consistent, and version-controlled, just like application code. However, AWS
CloudFormation and Terraform require developers to use specific
configuration languages, which can be restrictive. These tools utilize JSON,
YAML, and HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL), limiting the choice of
programming languages for defining infrastructure. Many developers prefer to
use the language they are more comfortable with, such as JavaScript or
Python. This is where AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK) comes into
play. With AWS CDK, developers can create IaC with JavaScript, TypeScript,
Python, Java, C#, and Go. Figure 6.8 illustrates how these services fit into the
CI/CD pipeline and IaC landscape.
FIGURE 6.8 CI/CD pipeline.
MLOps Orchestration
Orchestration tools are key in automating and managing complex ML
workflows. MLOps integrates the principles of DevOps into ML ensuring
continuous integration, delivery, and deployment of ML models.
For the exam, in addition to Amazon SageMaker Pipelines—which was
already introduced—you need to be aware of other options: namely, AWS
Step Functions and Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow. AWS
Step Functions is a powerful orchestration service that enables you to
coordinate multiple AWS services into serverless workflows, making it easier
to build and monitor automated processes. Amazon Managed Workflows for
Apache Airflow is another key orchestration service that simplifies the setup
and operation of Apache Airflow, allowing you to programmatically author,
schedule, and monitor workflows. These tools are essential for managing the
various stages of the ML pipeline, from data preprocessing and feature
engineering to model training, evaluation, and deployment. Let’s now review
these two orchestration tools in more detail.
AWS Step Functions
AWS Step Functions is a serverless orchestration service that allows you to
coordinate multiple AWS services into scalable workflows. By using AWS
Step Functions, you can design and run complex workflows that are composed
of individual tasks, each representing a step in the process. The service
provides a visual interface to build workflows, making it easier to monitor and
manage the execution of each step. In the context of MLOps with Amazon
SageMaker AI, AWS Step Functions can orchestrate the entire ML lifecycle,
from data preprocessing and feature engineering to model training, tuning, and
deployment. You can define state machines that capture the sequence of tasks,
and AWS Step Functions ensures that each step is executed in the correct
order and handles errors gracefully. Additionally, AWS Step Functions
supports large-scale parallel workflows, enabling concurrent executions of
your data-intensive ML tasks. This orchestration capability simplifies the
management of ML pipelines, improves repeatability, and enhances the overall
efficiency of ML operations.
Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow
Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA) is a managed
service that simplifies the setup and operation of Apache Airflow, an open-
source workflow orchestration platform. Airflow allows you to
programmatically author, schedule, and monitor workflows, making it ideal
for managing complex data pipelines. With MWAA, AWS handles the
provisioning, scaling, and maintenance of Airflow environments, allowing you
to focus on building and managing workflows without the overhead of
infrastructure management. MWAA integrates seamlessly with other AWS
services, such as S3, Redshift, and Elastic Map Reduce (EMR), enabling you
to create highly scalable and reliable data workflows. In the context of
MLOps, MWAA can be used to orchestrate the various stages of the ML
pipeline, including data extraction, transformation, loading (ETL), model
training, evaluation, and deployment. By leveraging MWAA, organizations
can ensure that their data workflows are efficient, consistent, and resilient,
providing a robust foundation for their ML operations.
Choosing an Orchestration Tool
When selecting an orchestration tool for ML workflows in AWS, it’s
important to consider the complexity of your workflows and your team’s
familiarity with the tools.
AWS Step Functions is a serverless, easy-to-use orchestration service that
integrates seamlessly with other AWS services. It is ideal for orchestrating
end-to-end ML pipelines, providing a visual interface for designing and
monitoring workflows. It is well-suited for teams seeking simplicity and
minimal operational overhead.
MWAA caters to more customizable and flexible orchestration needs. It
supports complex workflows and offers a rich plugin ecosystem, making it
perfect for data engineering tasks and for teams familiar with Apache Airflow.
MWAA handles the provisioning, scaling, and maintenance of Airflow
environments, allowing you to focus on workflow management.
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines is specifically designed for ML workflows. It
provides built-in orchestration capabilities that allow ML engineers and data
scientists to define, visualize, and automate end-to-end ML processes.
Amazon SageMaker Pipelines seamlessly integrates with other Amazon
SageMaker services, making it an excellent choice for managing the entire
ML lifecycle, from data preprocessing and feature engineering to model
training, tuning, and deployment.
The choice between AWS Step Functions, Amazon MWAA, and Amazon
SageMaker Pipelines ultimately depends on your specific use case. AWS Step
Functions and Amazon MWAA offer general-purpose orchestration for a
variety of workflows, whereas Amazon SageMaker Pipelines is tailored
specifically for ML ensuring seamless integration with the entire Amazon
SageMaker ecosystem.
Figure 6.9 summarizes the repository and orchestration services you just
learned to help streamline your ML workflows and ensure efficient, repeatable
operations.
FIGURE 6.9 Repository and orchestration services.
In the upcoming sections, we will focus our attention on Amazon SageMaker
Pipelines, which is the a key requirement for the exam.
Automating Model Building and Deployment
Automating model building and deployment using Amazon SageMaker
Pipelines involves creating a sequence of well-defined steps that form your
ML workflow. This automation ensures that each phase of the ML process is
executed efficiently, consistently, and reliably. One of the significant benefits
provided by Amazon SageMaker Pipelines is repeatability. Amazon
SageMaker Pipelines can help you transform manual tasks into streamlined,
repeatable processes, resulting in workflows that can be reliably re-created and
produce consistent results. This repeatability aspect is critical for validating
models, conducting experiments, and ensuring that the results can be
replicated by different team members or over time. This is particularly helpful
if you consider the iterative nature of the ML lifecycle. Additionally, this
approach allows data scientists and ML engineers to focus on more critical,
high-value activities, enhancing productivity and reducing the chances of
human error, leading to more robust and reliable models. Think of each step in
the pipeline as a LEGO block. Just as LEGO blocks are assembled to create a
complex structure, each step in the ML workflow is like a block that
contributes to building a complete and functional ML pipeline.
The first step in automating model building and deployment is to identify and
define the critical components of your ML workflow. These components
typically include data preprocessing, feature engineering, model training,
evaluation, and deployment. Each of these components is represented as a
separate step in the pipeline. For example, the data preprocessing step involves
cleaning and transforming raw data into a format suitable for model training,
and the feature engineering step focuses on creating new features or modifying
existing ones to improve model performance. This modular approach ensures
that each step is independently developed and optimized, which can
significantly improve the overall efficiency of the workflow.
Once the individual steps are defined, they are combined into a single pipeline
using the Amazon SageMaker Pipeline object. This pipeline ensures that the
steps are executed in the correct sequence, with each step being completed
before the next one begins. Additionally, triggers and schedules can be set up
to automate the execution of the pipeline, ensuring that it runs at regular
intervals or in response to specific events. This automation not only saves time
but also ensures that the models are continuously updated and refined as new
data becomes available. Ultimately, this leads to better-performing models that
can adapt to changing data patterns and deliver more accurate predictions.
The following sections describe how to design and implement a simple
pipeline to deploy a model.
Define the Workflow Steps
You start by identifying the critical components of your ML workflow:
Data preprocessing: Cleaning and transforming raw data
Feature engineering: Enhancing data to improve model accuracy
Model training: Using algorithms to build the model
Model evaluation: Assessing model performance
Model deployment: Deploying the trained model to production
Each of these components will be mapped to individual steps in the pipeline.
Create and Configure Pipeline Steps
The Amazon SageMaker Pipeline Python SDK provides classes for each step
in the pipeline, so you don’t have to “reinvent the wheel.” This makes it easy
to define and configure each component of the workflow:
ProcessingStep: For data preprocessing tasks
TransformStep: For feature engineering tasks
TrainingStep: For training the model
ModelStep: For deploying the model
For example, you can start by creating a pipeline session:
from sagemaker.workflow.pipeline_context import 
PipelineSession
       
# Create a PipelineSession
pipeline_session = PipelineSession()
Define the processing step:
from sagemaker.processing import ScriptProcessor
from sagemaker.workflow.steps import ProcessingStep
         
# Define the data preprocessing step
processor = ScriptProcessor(
    image_uri='your_image_uri',
    role='your_iam_role',
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m5.large',
    sagemaker_session=pipeline_session
)
      
processing_step = ProcessingStep(
    name="DataPreprocessing",
    processor=processor,
    inputs=[...],
    outputs=[...],
    code="preprocessing_script.py"
)
Define the feature engineering step:
from sagemaker.transformer import Transformer
from sagemaker.workflow.steps import TransformStep
     
# Define the feature engineering step
transformer = Transformer(
    model_name='your_model_name',
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m5.large',
    output_path='s3://your-bucket/transform-output',
    sagemaker_session=pipeline_session
)
     
feature_engineering_step = TransformStep(
    name="FeatureEngineering",
    transformer=transformer,
    inputs={
        'data': 's3://your-bucket/processed-data'
    }
)
# Add dependency to ensure feature engineering step runs 
after processing step
feature_engineering_step.add_depends_on([processing_step])
Define the training step:
from sagemaker.estimator import Estimator
from sagemaker.workflow.steps import TrainingStep
     
# Define the model training step
estimator = Estimator(
    image_uri='your_image_uri',
    role='your_iam_role',
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m5.large',
    hyperparameters={'max_depth': 5, 'eta': 0.2},
    sagemaker_session=pipeline_session
)
     
training_step = TrainingStep(
    name="ModelTraining",
    estimator=estimator,
    inputs={
        'train': 's3://your-bucket/train-data',
        'validation': 's3://your-bucket/validation-data'
    }
)
# Add dependency to ensure training step runs after 
feature engineering step
training_step.add_depends_on([feature_engineering_step])
Define the deployment step:
from sagemaker.model import Model
from sagemaker.workflow.steps import ModelStep
      
# Define the model deployment step
model = Model(
    model_data='s3://your-bucket/model.tar.gz',
    role='your_iam_role',
    entry_point='inference_script.py',
    sagemaker_session=pipeline_session
)
     
model_step = ModelStep(
    name="ModelDeployment",
    model=model,
    inputs=[...],
    outputs=[...]
)
# Add dependency to ensure deployment step runs after 
training step
model_step.add_depends_on([training_step])
Define the Pipeline
Once all the steps are defined, you can put them all together into a single
pipeline using the Amazon SageMaker Pipeline object. This process
ensures that the steps are executed in the correct sequence, with each step
being completed before the next one begins. By composing each step into a
unified pipeline, you create a seamless and automated workflow that is both
efficient and reliable. Moreover, Amazon SageMaker Pipelines offers built-in
error-handling capabilities. If an error occurs in any step of the pipeline, the
process can be halted, and notifications can be sent to alert the relevant team
members. This ensures that errors are promptly addressed, maintaining the
integrity of the workflow:
from sagemaker.workflow.pipeline import Pipeline
      
# Define the pipeline by putting all the steps together
pipeline = Pipeline(
    name="MyMLPipeline",
    steps=[processing_step, feature_engineering_step, 
training_step, model_step]
)
Set Up Triggers and Schedules
You can now automate the pipeline execution by setting up triggers and
schedules. For example, you can use Amazon EventBridge to trigger the
pipeline based on specific events. The following snippet shows you how you
can create an EventBridge rule to trigger MyMLPipeline when a new object
is uploaded to an S3 bucket:
import boto3
       
# Create an EventBridge client
client = boto3.client('events')
      
# Create an EventBridge rule
response = client.put_rule(
    Name='MyMLPipelineRule',
    EventPattern='{\n    "source": 
["aws.s3"],\n    "detail-type": ["AWS API Call via 
CloudTrail"],\n    "detail": {\n        "eventSource": 
["s3.amazonaws.com"],\n        "eventName": 
["PutObject"]\n    }\n}',
    State='ENABLED',
    Description='Rule to trigger MyMLPipeline when a new 
object is uploaded to S3'
)
     
# Add targets to the rule
response = client.put_targets(
    Rule='MyMLPipelineRule',
    Targets=[
        {
            'Id': '1',
            'Arn': 'arn:aws:states:us-east-
1:123456789012:stateMachine:MyMLPipeline'
        }
    ]
)
Execute the Pipeline
Alternatively, you can manually start the pipeline execution using the Amazon
SageMaker SDK. Steps within the pipeline can also be executed concurrently
if they do not have dependencies on each other, allowing for more efficient
processing and reduced overall runtime:
pipeline.start()
Key Considerations
When using Amazon SageMaker Pipelines, scalability is a significant
advantage as it automatically manages and scales the required infrastructure,
ensuring that your ML workflows perform efficiently and reliably. However, it
is your responsibility—as an ML engineer—to implement robust monitoring
and logging to keep track of pipeline performance and troubleshoot any issues
that may arise. This integration helps maintain the health of your pipelines and
ensures smooth operations. Error handling is another crucial aspect to
consider. Amazon SageMaker Pipelines offers built-in error-handling
capabilities, which halt the process if an error occurs in any step, and
notifications are sent to alert relevant team members. This ensures that errors
are promptly addressed, maintaining the integrity of the workflow.
Concurrency is also a vital consideration in Amazon SageMaker Pipelines.
Steps within the pipeline can be executed concurrently if they do not have
dependencies on each other, optimizing processing time and efficiency. This
concurrent execution allows for more efficient use of resources and reduced
overall runtime. By automating these key aspects—scalability, monitoring,
error handling, and concurrency—you can ensure that your ML processes are
not only effective but also resilient and adaptable to changing demands.
Deep Dive Model Deployment Example
In this section, we will extend the model tuning deep-dive example in Chapter
5 by exposing the best model with a serverless inference endpoint. We are also
going to test the deployed endpoint by creating a simple inference request and
by letting the serverless endpoint generate a prediction based on the request.
For the sake of simplicity, cost, and time, we are going to use 3 jobs (instead
of 20) to select the best model: i.e., the model with the maximum accuracy.
As a quick reminder, the deep-dive example at the end of Chapter 5 was
intended to evaluate the performance of the XGBoost algorithm against the
Digits dataset using Amazon SageMaker AI Automatic Model Tuning (AMT)
with Bayesian optimization strategy.
The expected outcome of this example is a functioning model deployment in
the form of a serverless inference endpoint that can receive inference requests
and generate accurate predictions. The inference requests are CSV
representations of handwritten digits, which are then processed by the
deployed model to predict the corresponding digit class.
I ran this Python program using the Code Editor feature of Amazon
SageMaker Studio:
import boto3
import sagemaker
import json
from sagemaker import get_execution_role
from sagemaker.tuner import HyperparameterTuner, 
IntegerParameter, ContinuousParameter
from sagemaker.inputs import TrainingInput
from sagemaker.analytics import 
HyperparameterTuningJobAnalytics
from sagemaker.serverless import ServerlessInferenceConfig
from sagemaker.model import Model
from sagemaker.predictor import Predictor
from sagemaker.serializers import CSVSerializer
from sagemaker.deserializers import JSONDeserializer
from sklearn.datasets import load_digits
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import pandas as pd
import os
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    
# Load the Digits dataset
digits = load_digits()
X = digits.data
y = digits.target
       
# Split the dataset
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, 
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
      
# Convert to DataFrame and ensure the target is the first 
column
train_data = pd.DataFrame(X_train)
train_data['target'] = y_train
train_data.insert(0, 'target', train_data.pop('target'))
      
val_data = pd.DataFrame(X_test)
val_data['target'] = y_test
val_data.insert(0, 'target', val_data.pop('target'))
      
# Create directories if they don't exist
data_dir = './ch06/data'
os.makedirs(data_dir, exist_ok=True)
      
# Save locally
train_data.to_csv(os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.csv'), 
index=False)
val_data.to_csv(os.path.join(data_dir, 'validation.csv'), 
index=False)
      
# Upload to S3
s3 = boto3.client('s3')
bucket_name = 'ch05-ml-hpo'
prefix = 'sagemaker/xgboost-digits'
s3.upload_file(os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.csv'), 
bucket_name, f'{prefix}/train/train.csv')
s3.upload_file(os.path.join(data_dir, 'validation.csv'), 
bucket_name, f'{prefix}/validation/validation.csv')
      
# Define the role and session
role = get_execution_role()
session = sagemaker.Session()
      
# Define the XGBoost image
region = boto3.Session().region_name
xgb_image = sagemaker.image_uris.retrieve("xgboost", 
region, "1.2-1")
      
# Define the S3 paths for the input data
s3_train_data = 
f's3://{bucket_name}/{prefix}/train/train.csv'
s3_val_data = 
f's3://{bucket_name}/{prefix}/validation/validation.csv'
      
# Define the data channels
train_data = TrainingInput(s3_data=s3_train_data, 
content_type='csv')
val_data = TrainingInput(s3_data=s3_val_data, 
content_type='csv')
      
# Define the XGBoost estimator with required 
hyperparameters
xgb = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
    image_uri=xgb_image,
    role=role,
    instance_count=1,
    instance_type='ml.m5.large',
    output_path=f's3://{bucket_name}/{prefix}/output',
    sagemaker_session=session,
    hyperparameters={
        'objective': 'multi:softmax',  # Example for 
multi-class classification
        'num_class': 10,  # Number of classes in the 
Digits dataset
        'num_round': 100  # Default value; will be tuned
    }
)
      
# Define the hyperparameter ranges
hpt_ranges = {
    'alpha': ContinuousParameter(0.01, 0.5),
    'eta': ContinuousParameter(0.1, 0.5),
    'min_child_weight': ContinuousParameter(0.0, 2.0),
    'max_depth': IntegerParameter(1, 10)
}
      
# Define the hyperparameter tuner
tuner = HyperparameterTuner(
    estimator=xgb,
    base_tuning_job_name='bayesian',
    objective_metric_name='validation:accuracy',
    hyperparameter_ranges=hpt_ranges,
    strategy='Bayesian',
    max_jobs=3,  # Reduced from 20 to 3 max jobs
    max_parallel_jobs=3,  # Number of parallel jobs
    objective_type='Maximize'
)
      
# Launch the hyperparameter tuning job
tuner.fit({'train': train_data, 'validation': val_data})
tuner.wait()
      
# Get the best training job name
best_training_job_name = tuner.best_training_job()
      
# Retrieve the tuning results
tuning_job_name = tuner.latest_tuning_job.name
tuner_analytics = 
HyperparameterTuningJobAnalytics(tuning_job_name)
tuner_df = tuner_analytics.dataframe()
      
# Extract the best hyperparameters
if 'FinalHyperParameters' in tuner_df.columns:
    best_hyperparameters = 
tuner_df.loc[tuner_df['TrainingJobName'] == 
best_training_job_name, 'FinalHyperParameters'].values[0]
else:
    best_hyperparameters = 
tuner_df.loc[tuner_df['TrainingJobName'] == 
best_training_job_name].drop(['TrainingJobName', 
'FinalObjectiveValue'], axis=1).to_dict('records')[0]
      
# Print the best training job and hyperparameters
print(f"Best Training Job: {best_training_job_name}")
print("Best Hyperparameters:")
for key, value in best_hyperparameters.items():
    print(f"  {key}: {value}")
      
# Plot the tuning job results
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 8))
plt.scatter(tuner_df.index, 
tuner_df['FinalObjectiveValue'], label='Tuning Jobs')
plt.scatter(tuner_df.loc[tuner_df['TrainingJobName'] == 
best_training_job_name].index,
            tuner_df.loc[tuner_df['TrainingJobName'] == 
best_training_job_name]['FinalObjectiveValue'],
            color='red', marker='*', s=200, label='Best 
Job')
      
plt.xlabel('Iteration')
plt.ylabel('Cross-Validation Accuracy')
plt.title('Hyperparameter Tuning Results')
      
# Display the best hyperparameters on the plot
best_hyperparameters_str = '\n'.join([f'{key}: {value}' 
for key, value in best_hyperparameters.items()])
plt.figtext(0.5, -0.15, f'Best 
Hyperparameters:\n{best_hyperparameters_str}', 
ha='center', va='top', fontsize=10, 
bbox=dict(facecolor='lightgrey', alpha=0.5))
      
# Update legend position below the x-axis
plt.legend(loc='upper center', bbox_to_anchor=(0.5, -0.2), 
ncol=3)
      
# Save the plot as an image file
output_dir = './ch06/images'
os.makedirs(output_dir, exist_ok=True)
plt.savefig(os.path.join(output_dir, 
'tuning_results.png'), bbox_inches='tight')
plt.close()
      
# Create a serverless inference configuration
serverless_config = ServerlessInferenceConfig(
    memory_size_in_mb=2048,
    max_concurrency=5
)
      
# Define the custom predictor class (if you have one)
class CustomPredictor(Predictor):
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
        # You can add custom initialization code here
      
# Retrieve the best model from the hyperparameter tuning 
job
best_model = Model(
    image_uri=xgb_image,
     
 
   model_data=f's3://{bucket_name}/{prefix}/output/{best_t
raining_job_name}/output/model.tar.gz',
    role=role,
    sagemaker_session=session,
    predictor_cls=CustomPredictor  # Specify the custom 
predictor class
)
      
# Deploy the best model as a serverless endpoint with a 
unique endpoint name
try:
    predictor = best_model.deploy(
        serverless_inference_config=serverless_config,
        endpoint_name='xgboost-digits-serverless-endpoint-
dario',   # Use a unique endpoint name
        serializer=CSVSerializer(),  # Specify CSV 
serializer
        deserializer=JSONDeserializer()  # Optional: 
Specify a deserializer
    )
    print(f"Successfully deployed serverless endpoint: 
{predictor.endpoint_name}")
except Exception as e:
    print("Failed to deploy serverless endpoint")
    print(e)
    predictor = None
      
# Example inference
if predictor is not None:
    test_sample = X_test[0].reshape(1, -1)
    test_sample_csv = ','.join(map(str, 
test_sample.flatten()))  # Convert numpy array to CSV-
encoded string
    result = predictor.predict(test_sample_csv)
    print('Prediction for the first test sample:', result)
else:
    print("Cannot perform inference because the predictor 
object is None")
      
# Plot and save the test sample image without extra data 
points
plt.figure(figsize=(4, 4))
image_sample = X_test[0].reshape(8, 8)
output_image_path = os.path.join(output_dir, 
'test_sample_image.png')
plt.imshow(image_sample, cmap='gray')
plt.title(f"Test sample label (actual digit): 
{y_test[0]}")
plt.axis('off')   # Turn off the axis
plt.savefig(output_image_path)
plt.close()
      
print(f"Test sample image saved to: {output_image_path}")
Because we already covered in Chapter 5 the model tuning aspects of the
program, let’s focus now on how this program deploys the best model.
The deployment phase involves several key steps to ensure that the model can
handle inference requests efficiently. Initially, the program sets up a serverless
inference configuration object ServerlessInferenceConfig, specifying
critical parameters such as memory size and maximum concurrency to
optimize resource allocation. This configuration helps Amazon SageMaker AI
manage the computational resources needed to serve inference requests
dynamically, without requiring dedicated instances.
The best trained model, saved as model.tar.gz in an S3 bucket, is then
retrieved for deployment. The Model object is created, specifying the S3 path
to the model.tar.gz artifact file and the XGBoost container image URI.
This container (xgboost:1.2-1) is designed to work seamlessly with the
serialized model format, ensuring compatibility and ease of deployment.
When the deploy method of the Model object is called, Amazon SageMaker
orchestrates the deployment process. The container starts up and downloads
the model artifacts file model.tar.gz, decompressing it automatically. The
decompressed files are placed in the appropriate directories within the
container, and the XGBoost model is loaded into memory, ready to serve
inference requests. This automation ensures that the model is correctly
initialized and available for predictions.
To handle inference requests, the endpoint expects input in CSV format, which
is ensured by using a CSVSerializer for input data and a
JSONDeserializer for output data. A unique endpoint name is assigned to
avoid conflicts, and the CustomPredictor class is used to manage
interactions with the endpoint. The endpoint exposes an API that processes
CSV representations of hand-written digits, performs predictions, and returns
the results.
The program concludes by performing an example inference using the
deployed endpoint. A test sample is converted to a CSV-encoded string and
sent to the endpoint. The predicted digit class is then returned and displayed,
as displayed in Figure 6.10.
FIGURE 6.10 Prediction from the serverless inference endpoint.
As you can see, the model correctly predicted the test sample, which is a CSV-
representation of the digit 6.
Figure 6.11 displays the serverless endpoint.
FIGURE 6.11 Serverless inference endpoint summary.
Notice at the bottom of Figure 6.11 the endpoint model, the variant, the max
concurrency, and the memory size we set up programmatically in the code.
Because its status is “In service,” the endpoint is ready to serve inference
requests at the specified URL.
Amazon SageMaker Studio allows you to test your endpoint directly from the
UI. In Figure 6.12, you can see the result of testing the endpoint by sending
the CSV-encoded string of the test sample.
FIGURE 6.12 Test inference.
Last, if you are curious to see the model’s hyperparameters and why it was
chosen by the Bayesian strategy during the tuning process, I have included the
plot in Figure 6.13.
FIGURE 6.13 Model selection.
You just learned how to programmatically deploy a model to a serverless
inference endpoint. This deployment process, leveraging the power of
Amazon SageMaker AI’s managed containers and serverless infrastructure,
ensures efficient and scalable handling of inference requests without the need
for manual resource management.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to make the models you carefully developed
and refined ready to work. If your use case is a good fit for AWS AI services,
AWS provides a suite of fully managed AI services that can be easily
incorporated into applications through API calls. These services include
Amazon Rekognition, Textract, Polly, Transcribe, Translate, Comprehend,
Lex, and Personalize, which offer pretrained models for various tasks.
Because these models are hosted in managed AWS accounts, users have
limited access to the underlying models; however, these pretrained models can
be easily consumed, allowing for rapid integration and deployment without the
need for complex model management. Additionally, you learned how Amazon
Bedrock requires a different approach to deploying models by using the
concept of agents and the Converse API, which act as intermediaries between
your application and the foundation models, offering both comprehensive
orchestration and streamlined conversational interactions. This initial step sets
the foundation for leveraging AI capabilities effectively in AWS.
Building on the ease of using AWS AI services, Amazon SageMaker AI offers
several deployment options to manage and host ML models. These options
include real-time inference for low-latency predictions, serverless inference
for automatic scaling (as demonstrated in the deep-dive exercise),
asynchronous inference for handling large payloads and long processing times,
and batch inference for processing large datasets in bulk. Each deployment
method is designed to cater to specific use cases, ensuring flexibility and
scalability in model deployment.
Although Amazon SageMaker AI provides robust managed deployment
options, there are scenarios where unmanaged model deployments are more
suitable. This involves deploying models on alternative compute platforms,
such as Amazon EC2 instances, Amazon EKS clusters, AWS Lambda
functions, and even on-premises servers. Although this approach requires
more manual effort for infrastructure setup, scaling, and maintenance, it offers
greater control and customization over the deployment environment.
To further enhance model performance and deployment efficiency, Amazon
SageMaker Neo can be used to optimize models for various hardware
platforms, reducing latency and improving performance. Advanced
deployment techniques, such as autoscaling and Blue/Green deployments
(including All At Once, Canary, and Linear strategies), enable safe and
controlled updates to models as they get deployed. These methods ensure
continuous improvement and robust deployment strategies, making the
deployment process more resilient and efficient.
Finally, you learned how orchestrating ML workflows is essential for
managing the end-to-end ML lifecycle. Amazon SageMaker Pipelines
provides a powerful way to automate workflows from data preparation to
model deployment. Moreover, services like Amazon Managed Workflows for
Apache Airflow and AWS Step Functions can be integrated to enhance
orchestration capabilities, allowing for complex workflows and conditional
logic. This orchestration ensures that ML processes are streamlined,
repeatable, and maintainable, ultimately accelerating model deployment and
improving operational efficiency.
Exam Essentials
Know the difference between inference infrastructure and training
infrastructure. Inference infrastructure generally requires significantly less
compute and memory than training infrastructure because inference only
involves applying a pretrained model to new data, whereas training involves
the computationally intensive process of learning and optimizing the model
parameters from a large dataset.
Know Amazon SageMaker AI’s managed deployment options. Amazon
SageMaker AI offers four managed deployment options to cater to diverse use
cases. Real-time inference provides low-latency endpoints for immediate
predictions, perfect for interactive applications. Serverless inference
automatically scales resources based on traffic, ideal for applications with
intermittent or unpredictable patterns. Asynchronous inference handles large
payloads and long processing times efficiently, making it suitable for heavy
workloads. Batch inference processes large datasets in bulk, ideal for non-real-
time predictions. These options ensure flexibility, scalability, and efficiency,
allowing you to choose the best approach for your specific use case.
Know when to use multi-model endpoints (MMEs) vs. multi-container
endpoints (MCEs). Use MMEs to host multiple models within the same
container on a single endpoint when you have many models with low traffic
volume and want to save on costs by sharing resources. Use MCEs to host
different models in separate containers on a single endpoint when each model
has distinct dependencies and resource requirements and you need better
isolation and scalability for independent updates.
Know when to use CPU- vs. GPU-powered infrastructure. Use GPU-
powered infrastructure for compute-intensive jobs to train deep learning
models with large amounts of data. Use CPU-powered infrastructure for tasks
that don’t require the massive parallel processing capabilities of GPUs. These
tasks include preprocessing data, performing feature engineering, running
smaller training jobs, and handling inference tasks where the computational
demands are lower.
Know the autoscaling metrics for Amazon SageMaker AI endpoints. 
Autoscaling metrics include InvocationsPerInstance, which measures
the average number of invocations per instance per minute;
CPUUtilization, tracking the percentage of CPU usage; Latency,
measuring the time taken to process requests; and GPUUtilization, which
measures the percentage of GPU usage. These metrics help create scaling
policies to automatically adjust the number of instances, ensuring optimal
performance and cost-efficiency.
Know when to use All At Once, Canary, and Linear traffic-shifting
patterns with Blue/Green deployments. Use the All At Once traffic-
shifting pattern for Blue/Green deployments when you have high confidence
in the new version of your model and want a quick transition. Choose the
Canary pattern when you want to minimize risk by gradually shifting a small
portion of traffic (Canary) to the new version and monitoring its performance
before a full rollout. Choose the Linear pattern for a controlled, step-by-step
traffic shift, providing the most balanced approach that allows for incremental
monitoring and adjustments.
Know the different ML workflow orchestration services available with
AWS and when to use them. AWS offers several ML workflow
orchestration services to streamline and manage ML pipelines: Amazon
SageMaker Pipelines for automating end-to-end ML workflows, perfect for
managing the entire ML lifecycle; AWS Step Functions for coordinating
complex workflows with multiple steps, ideal for integrating with other AWS
services and handling error recovery; and Amazon Managed Workflows for
Apache Airflow (MWAA) for managing Apache Airflow workflows in a fully
managed environment, suitable for orchestrating complex workflows like ETL
jobs or ML pipelines with minimal operational overhead.
Review Questions
1. Which instance type should you select for an Amazon SageMaker AI
multi-model endpoint hosting several deep learning models trained on
large datasets to optimize cost and performance?
A. t2.medium
B. m5.xlarge
C. p3.8xlarge
D. c5.4xlarge
2. When configuring an Amazon SageMaker AI endpoint, under what
circumstances would you choose a managed deployment over an
unmanaged deployment?
A. When you require full control over the deployment infrastructure
B. When you need seamless scalability and managed resource
allocation
C. When deploying models on non-AWS environments
D. When you need to customize the deployment setup extensively
3. Which traffic shifting pattern is most appropriate for deploying a critical
model update with minimum risk and thorough performance monitoring
before full rollout?
A. All At Once
B. Linear
C. Canary
D. Partial
4. What is the primary advantage of using Amazon SageMaker Neo for
model deployment in an IoT environment?
A. To reduce the cost of training models
B. To ensure high accuracy of predictions
C. To optimize models for diverse hardware, enabling efficient edge
deployments
D. To improve data preprocessing speed
5. Which Amazon SageMaker AI orchestration service would you use to
automate end-to-end machine learning workflows with minimal manual
intervention?
A. Amazon SageMaker Pipelines
B. Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA)
C. AWS Step Functions
D. Amazon SageMaker Clarify
6. Which EC2 instance type should you choose for an inference workload
that requires high throughput and low latency using custom-built machine
learning models?
A. t3.medium
B. r5.4xlarge
C. g4dn.xlarge
D. inf1.2xlarge
7. When should you select Amazon SageMaker Serverless Inference as a
managed deployment option?
A. When you need low-latency real-time predictions
B. When you have intermittent or unpredictable traffic patterns
C. When you require high-throughput batch processing
D. When you need to run inference on large payloads with long
processing times
8. When should you choose AWS Step Functions over Amazon SageMaker
Pipelines and MWAA for ML workflow orchestration?
A. When you need to automate simple ETL tasks
B. When you require a managed service to orchestrate complex ML
workflows with conditional branching and error handling
C. When you need to use prebuilt templates for ML projects
D. When you need to perform bias detection and explain model
predictions
9. What are the key functionalities provided by the Amazon SageMaker
Model Registry, and when should you use it in a continuous
integration/continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipeline?
A. It provides model monitoring and bias detection capabilities; use it
to continuously monitor model performance in production.
B. It offers model versioning, approval workflows, and deployment
automation; use it to manage and deploy models efficiently in a
CI/CD pipeline.
C. It simplifies data preprocessing and feature engineering; use it to
prepare datasets for training.
D. It integrates with AWS Step Functions for orchestrating complex
ML workflows; use it to coordinate multiple ML tasks.
10. When should you use the Amazon Bedrock Converse API in Amazon
SageMaker AI?
A. For managing and deploying machine learning models
B. For automated real-time natural language understanding and
generation tasks
C. For conducting data preprocessing and feature engineering
D. For optimizing models for various hardware platforms
